01_introduction.md, before:

# Introduction

Bloodlines is played with one game master (**GM**) and one or more
**players**. Each player plays the role of a player character (**PC**) which
they create as the game begins. The GM designs and plays the role of the world
around the PCs, including its cast of nonplayer characters (**NPCs**),
including everything from elvish royalty to rival adventurers or hideous
dungeon monsters.

The players and the GM work together to tell stories about the adventures of
the PCs. They could tell an action story, where the PCs hack away at
bloodthirsty monsters in defense of civilization. It could be a story of
exploration, where the PCs venture into long-forgotten tombs in search of
treasure. It could even be a tale of political intrigue, where PCs take
advantage of instability to consolidate power.

The story is played out scene by scene. The GM opens with a quick description;
from there, play proceeds conversationally as the players and the GM improvise
back and forth. Players may speak as their PCs and describe their actions,
while the GM illustrates how the NPCs and environment respond. Players may
also ask the GM for specific details to help them immerse themselves in the
PCs' surroundings.

Play is punctuated by die rolls, which mediate the divide between player and
PC; PC choices are made by the players while the success of PC actions is
judged by dice. That is, the player decides which NPCs to attack and which to
barter with while the dice show whether a sword strikes home or a lie rings
true. This dichotomy gives each PC quantitative strengths and weaknesses while
still allowing players the freedom to play their PCs however they like.

The pages that follow explain how and when to roll the dice, but
above all Bloodlines is a social game. As such, the most important element is
communication. The players and the GM are not opponents (even though the PCs
and NPCs may well be enemies). Everyone has the same goals: telling a good
story and having a good time. If anyone is unsatisfied in either respect, play
should be put on hold to address the issue.

## About Bloodlines

Bloodlines reimagines classic concepts through a modern lens. The mechanics
are built from the ground up to enable and reward the smart, immersive play
style of early roleplaying games, without being bound by their mechanical
eccentricities. Similarly, Tolkien's influence is clear in the setting of
Bloodlines, but his moral absolutism is not; conflict stems from opposing
motivations and the will to survive, rather than from irredeemable evil.

In Bloodlines, Humanity finds itself inheriting a dangerous world. The ancient
peoples are in decline. The savage wilderness, once brought to heel by their
magic, rears its head. While the past age has been peaceful, these changes
promise to bring ancient enmities to the surface; PCs may find themselves
called to choose sides among multiple sympathetic factions.

The mechanics of Bloodlines exist solely to help the GM take the reins of this
world, and to help the players immerse themselves in it through their PCs. To
that end, the rules are concise, concrete, and consistent. While the pages
that follow are full of examples to impart readers with an intuitive grasp of
how the rules work, there are no tables to reference later, nor any obscure
exceptions or corner cases built into the system.

Bloodlines uses just as many numbers as it needs – no fewer, and certainly no
more. Player character abilities are are rated on a fine scale, allowing room
for personalization and advancement. On the other hand, NPCs and roll
difficulties fall on a coarse scale, making it easy for the GM to make quick,
intuitive judgments.

While the rules are light, Bloodlines is not shy about its use of dice; it
embraces the tactile satisfaction that comes with rolling a handful of them.
Action resolution in Bloodlines takes a novel approach to dice pools. A roll
can be made with just a word from the GM and a glance at the character sheet –
no arithmetic required.

That is, Bloodlines is a roleplaying game boiled down to its essence: a
setting ripe for exploration and adventure, and a rules framework that
incorporates dice in a satisfying but unobtrusive way.

## Game Materials

(working on it...)

Commit message:

Up to date
It's not perfect, but here's a functional game materials section. I chose not to include anything about optionally using miniatures to holistically lay out combat, though that may merit addition at a later time.

01_introduction.md, after:

# Introduction

Bloodlines is played with one game master (**GM**) and one or more
**players**. Each player plays the role of a player character (**PC**) which
they create as the game begins. The GM designs and plays the role of the world
around the PCs, including its cast of nonplayer characters (**NPCs**),
including everything from elvish royalty to rival adventurers or hideous
dungeon monsters.

The players and the GM work together to tell stories about the adventures of
the PCs. They could tell an action story, where the PCs hack away at
bloodthirsty monsters in defense of civilization. It could be a story of
exploration, where the PCs venture into long-forgotten tombs in search of
treasure. It could even be a tale of political intrigue, where PCs take
advantage of instability to consolidate power.

The story is played out scene by scene. The GM opens with a quick description;
from there, play proceeds conversationally as the players and the GM improvise
back and forth. Players may speak as their PCs and describe their actions,
while the GM illustrates how the NPCs and environment respond. Players may
also ask the GM for specific details to help them immerse themselves in the
PCs' surroundings.

Play is punctuated by die rolls, which mediate the divide between player and
PC; PC choices are made by the players while the success of PC actions is
judged by dice. That is, the player decides which NPCs to attack and which to
barter with while the dice show whether a sword strikes home or a lie rings
true. This dichotomy gives each PC quantitative strengths and weaknesses while
still allowing players the freedom to play their PCs however they like.

The pages that follow explain how and when to roll the dice, but
above all Bloodlines is a social game. As such, the most important element is
communication. The players and the GM are not opponents (even though the PCs
and NPCs may well be enemies). Everyone has the same goals: telling a good
story and having a good time. If anyone is unsatisfied in either respect, play
should be put on hold to address the issue.

## About Bloodlines

Bloodlines reimagines classic concepts through a modern lens. The mechanics
are built from the ground up to enable and reward the smart, immersive play
style of early roleplaying games, without being bound by their mechanical
eccentricities. Similarly, Tolkien's influence is clear in the setting of
Bloodlines, but his moral absolutism is not; conflict stems from opposing
motivations and the will to survive, rather than from irredeemable evil.

In Bloodlines, Humanity finds itself inheriting a dangerous world. The ancient
peoples are in decline. The savage wilderness, once brought to heel by their
magic, rears its head. While the past age has been peaceful, these changes
promise to bring ancient enmities to the surface; PCs may find themselves
called to choose sides among multiple sympathetic factions.

The mechanics of Bloodlines exist solely to help the GM take the reins of this
world, and to help the players immerse themselves in it through their PCs. To
that end, the rules are concise, concrete, and consistent. While the pages
that follow are full of examples to impart readers with an intuitive grasp of
how the rules work, there are no tables to reference later, nor any obscure
exceptions or corner cases built into the system.

Bloodlines uses just as many numbers as it needs – no fewer, and certainly no
more. Player character abilities are are rated on a fine scale, allowing room
for personalization and advancement. On the other hand, NPCs and roll
difficulties fall on a coarse scale, making it easy for the GM to make quick,
intuitive judgments.

While the rules are light, Bloodlines is not shy about its use of dice; it
embraces the tactile satisfaction that comes with rolling a handful of them.
Action resolution in Bloodlines takes a novel approach to dice pools. A roll
can be made with just a word from the GM and a glance at the character sheet –
no arithmetic required.

That is, Bloodlines is a roleplaying game boiled down to its essence: a
setting ripe for exploration and adventure, and a rules framework that
incorporates dice in a satisfying but unobtrusive way.

## Game Materials

Bloodlines is played with papers, pens, and dice. 

Four kinds of dice are used: four-, six-, eight-, and ten-sided. It's best to have about a dozen of each. Each kind of die should be kept in its own bowl or tray, in order to make it easy for players to pick up a handful of a single kind: four six-sided dice, five four-sided dice, seven ten-sided dice, etc. 

Four-sided dice merit particular attention. Traditional (pyramid-shaped) four-sided dice are difficult to pick up off a flat table, particularly a handful at a time. Barrel-shaped four-sided dice are recommended instead. 

Other than dice, the table needs only pens and paper. The GM should have a notebook (or some scratch paper, or a pile of notecards) to keep their notes. Each player needs a character sheet for their PC. The last page of this book contains a blank one; additionally, they can be downloaded and printed from **#####**. For added convenience, character sheets can even be laminated, so that wet-erase markers can be used to easily mark and unmark wounds.
