02_the_world_and_its_people.md, before:

# The World and its Peoples

At the dawn of the **First Age**, four peoples awakened: the Dwarves in the northern mountains, the Elves in the eastern forests, the Goblins in the southern swamps, and the Halflings in the western grasslands. For centuries, each lived isolated, oblivious to the existences of the others.

The **Second Age** was a time of exploration, then colonization, then
conflict. Cultures clashed with words and weaponry. Entire generations were
lost to perennial warfare.

Finally, there came the **Third Age**. Historical enmities were set aside, for
the most part, giving way to a time of coexistence, commerce, and prosperity.
This age saw the creation of titanic monuments, powerful artifacts, and
fantastical creatures. Its fruits impregnate every corner of the world.

It was not just culture and magic that were exchanged during this time,
however. Through a hundred generations of political marriages and forbidden
loves, bloodlines intermingled, creating to an entirely new people: Humans,
whose rise heralded the opening of the **Fourth Age**.

Humanity has inherited the strongest qualities of its parents – the strength of the Dwarves and the charisma of the Halflings – but not their magical gifts.  Few
Humans exhibit any magical ability at all, and the powers that do appear are
modest.

As if in sympathy to Humanity's rise, the world's magic diminishes.  Artifacts
crumble. Creatures turn on their creators. What magic remains – for now at
least – is chaotic and dangerous.

This change has not gone unnoticed. Many among the ancient peoples view it as
an omen that their stewardship over the world has ended. They gradually
withdraw. The majestic Elvish cities shut their gates; their populations
dwindle. Goblins take pilgrimages to the edges of the world, never to return.
All the while, Humanity's population swells.

Humanity is not the only thing that grows. As magic recedes, the
wilderness reasserts itself, becoming more savage and feral than any time in
living memory. Danger encroaches on Humanity from all sides.

None can say whether Humanity is ready for the trials that lie ahead of it. If
it does survive, it will be by the bravery and bloodshed of the heroes who
strike out into the wilderness, beating back the darkness and exploring the
unknown.

## Dwarves

The world's northmost reaches are crowned by mountains. Within these mountains live the Dwarves. Their cities, mines, and forges are carved into the living stone, and connected to one another by an expansive series of subterranean highways.

Dwarves are at least a head shorter than Humans, but weight just as much (if not more) due to their sturdy builds. Their coloration is earthy, anywhere from sandy to clay-red to obsidian. Dwarven women braid their long, thick hair into elaborate patterns, woven with beads of and precious metals and stones, while the men do the same with their beards. 

Dwarven society is orderly and traditional. Each city is made up of clans, and each clan within the city has its own role to fill, whether that be mining, smithing, or defending the city against the creatures of the deep earth. 

The Dwarves worship Valka, the Forgemother, who tends the world's molten core. It's said that she created the Dwarves with the first blow of her massive hammer, then breathed life into them with her bellows. Valka watches over parents, miners, smiths, and warriors, and has dominion over the elements of stone, fire, and metal.

## Elves

To the east of the mountains, the foothills are blanketed by a dense redwood
forest, home of the Elves. High above the forest floor, their beautiful cities
are sculpted from living wood.

Elves are tall and gaunt, with long fingers, pointed ears, and green-tinged
alabaster skin. Their hair is a mane of leaves, moss, and pine needles.

The Elves are wardens of the forest. They are friends to both plants and
animals, and watch carefully all who step within the borders of their realm.

## Goblins

The eastern edge of the world is wrapped in a lush mangrove swamp. The Goblins
live here, their tiny huts clustered together wherever solid ground is to be
had.

Goblins are short and wiry, with large, bald heads and exaggerated features –
their eyes, ears, and teeth seem far too large compared to the rest of their
bodies.

Goblins are devilishly fast. They are vicious hunters not because of tactics
or weapons, but because there is no creature that can outrun them, whether on
the ground or in the trees.

## Halflings

Between the forests of the Elves and the swamps of the Goblins lay the rolling
grasslands of the Halflings. Their small towns are surrounded by swaths of
tilled fields.

Halflings are a short folk with smooth, round cheeks. They sport curly hair on
their heads, as well as on the tops of their almost-always-bare feet.

Halflings are quiet artisans. Disinterested in danger and adventure, they are
content to farm their grains, brew their ales, and whittle their trinkets.

Commit message:

Elf update
Not as good as the Dwarf update, but we're on a bit of a time crunch at this point.

02_the_world_and_its_people.md, after:

# The World and its Peoples

At the dawn of the **First Age**, four peoples awakened: the Dwarves in the northern mountains, the Elves in the eastern forests, the Goblins in the southern swamps, and the Halflings in the western grasslands. For centuries, each lived isolated, oblivious to the existences of the others.

The **Second Age** was a time of exploration, then colonization, then
conflict. Cultures clashed with words and weaponry. Entire generations were
lost to perennial warfare.

Finally, there came the **Third Age**. Historical enmities were set aside, for
the most part, giving way to a time of coexistence, commerce, and prosperity.
This age saw the creation of titanic monuments, powerful artifacts, and
fantastical creatures. Its fruits impregnate every corner of the world.

It was not just culture and magic that were exchanged during this time,
however. Through a hundred generations of political marriages and forbidden
loves, bloodlines intermingled, creating to an entirely new people: Humans,
whose rise heralded the opening of the **Fourth Age**.

Humanity has inherited the strongest qualities of its parents – the strength of the Dwarves and the charisma of the Halflings – but not their magical gifts.  Few
Humans exhibit any magical ability at all, and the powers that do appear are
modest.

As if in sympathy to Humanity's rise, the world's magic diminishes.  Artifacts
crumble. Creatures turn on their creators. What magic remains – for now at
least – is chaotic and dangerous.

This change has not gone unnoticed. Many among the ancient peoples view it as
an omen that their stewardship over the world has ended. They gradually
withdraw. The majestic Elvish cities shut their gates; their populations
dwindle. Goblins take pilgrimages to the edges of the world, never to return.
All the while, Humanity's population swells.

Humanity is not the only thing that grows. As magic recedes, the
wilderness reasserts itself, becoming more savage and feral than any time in
living memory. Danger encroaches on Humanity from all sides.

None can say whether Humanity is ready for the trials that lie ahead of it. If
it does survive, it will be by the bravery and bloodshed of the heroes who
strike out into the wilderness, beating back the darkness and exploring the
unknown.

## Dwarves

The world's northmost reaches are crowned by mountains. Within these mountains live the Dwarves. Their cities, mines, and forges are carved into the living stone, and connected to one another by an expansive series of subterranean highways.

Dwarves are at least a head shorter than Humans, but weight just as much (if not more) due to their sturdy builds. Their coloration is earthy, anywhere from sandy to clay-red to obsidian. Dwarven women braid their long, thick hair into elaborate patterns, woven with beads of and precious metals and stones, while the men do the same with their beards. 

Dwarven society is orderly and traditional. Each city is made up of clans, and each clan within the city has its own role to fill, whether that be mining, smithing, or defending the city against the creatures of the deep earth. 

The Dwarves worship Valka, the Forgemother, who tends the world's molten core. It's said that she created the Dwarves with the first blow of her massive hammer, then breathed life into them with her bellows. Valka watches over parents, miners, smiths, and warriors, and has dominion over the elements of stone, fire, and metal.

## Elves

The world's eastern highlands are blanketed by a dense redwood forest, the home of the Elves. Their halls and towers are suspended high above the forest floor, sculpted from the boughs and trunks of living trees. 

Compared to Humans, Elves are tall and willowy. Their arms and legs are slender, and their ears and chins are pointed. In place of hair, Elves grow luxurious manes of moss, ivy, and pine needles; they give off the smell of flowers and are often attended by bees and butterflies.  

Much like the giant redwoods, Elves are ancient. Births and deaths are rare. As a result, Elvish society is egalitarian, even to the erosion of individual identity. There is no heirarchy or leadership; Elves do not even claim professions. Every Elf is a ranger, an astronomer, a healer, and an architect, able to fill whatever role falls to them on a given day. 

Elves follow the twins Aso and Osa, the god and goddess of the sun and moon respectively. They watch over the world, day and night, and preside over nature, the seasons, the passage of time, and the cycle of life and death.

## Goblins

The eastern edge of the world is wrapped in a lush mangrove swamp. The Goblins
live here, their tiny huts clustered together wherever solid ground is to be
had.

Goblins are short and wiry, with large, bald heads and exaggerated features –
their eyes, ears, and teeth seem far too large compared to the rest of their
bodies.

Goblins are devilishly fast. They are vicious hunters not because of tactics
or weapons, but because there is no creature that can outrun them, whether on
the ground or in the trees.

## Halflings

Between the forests of the Elves and the swamps of the Goblins lay the rolling
grasslands of the Halflings. Their small towns are surrounded by swaths of
tilled fields.

Halflings are a short folk with smooth, round cheeks. They sport curly hair on
their heads, as well as on the tops of their almost-always-bare feet.

Halflings are quiet artisans. Disinterested in danger and adventure, they are
content to farm their grains, brew their ales, and whittle their trinkets.
