# The World and its Peoples

At the dawn of the **First Age**, eight peoples awakened. For centuries, each
lived isolated, oblivious to the existences of the others.

The **Second Age** was a time of exploration, then colonization, then
conflict. Cultures clashed with words and weaponry. Entire generations were
lost to perennial warfare.

Finally, there came the **Third Age**. Historical enmities were set aside, for
the most part, giving way to a time of coexistence, commerce, and prosperity.
This age saw the creation of titanic monuments, powerful artifacts, and
fantastical creatures. Its fruits impregnate every corner of the world.

It was not just culture and magic that were exchanged during this time,
however. Through a hundred generations of political marriages and forbidden
loves, bloodlines intermingled, giving rise to an entirely new people: Humans,
whose rise heralded the opening of the **Fourth Age**.

Humanity has inherited the strongest qualities of its parents – the wits of
the Naga with the strength of the Orcs – but not their magical gifts.  Few
Humans exhibit any magical ability at all, and the powers that do appear are
modest.

As if in sympathy to Humanity's rise, the world's magic diminishes.  Artifacts
crumble. Creatures turn on their creators. What magic remains – for now at
least – is chaotic and dangerous.

This change has not gone unnoticed. Many among the ancient peoples view it as
an omen that their stewardship over the world has ended. They gradually
withdraw. The majestic Dwarven cities shut their gates; their populations
dwindle. Elves take pilgrimages to the edges of the world, never to return.
All the while, Humanity's population swells.

Humanity is not the only thing that grows, however. As magic recedes, the
wilderness reasserts itself, becoming more savage and feral than any time in
living memory. Danger encroaches on Humanity from all sides.

None can say whether Humanity is ready for the trials that lie ahead of it. If
it does survive, it will be by the bravery and bloodshed of the heroes who
strike out into the wilderness, beating back the darkness and exploring the
unknown.

## Dwarves

At the heart of the world are the mountains, and at the heart of the mountains
live the Dwarves. Their mines and halls are nestled deep in the world's
foundation.

Dwarves are short and broad, with earthy coloration. The men weave their
beards into elaborate braids, and the women do the same with their hair.

Dwarves are famed warriors. Their deep-sourced ores are crafted into exquisite
weapons, which in turn are used to fend off the creatures of the deep.

## Elves

To the east of the mountains, the foothills are blanketed by a dense redwood
forest, home of the Elves. High above the forest floor, their beautiful cities
are sculpted from living wood.

Elves are tall and gaunt, with long fingers, pointed ears, and green-tinged
alabaster skin. Their hair is a mane of leaves, moss, and pine needles.

The Elves are wardens of the forest. They are friends to both plants and
animals, and watch carefully all who step within the borders of their realm.

## Goblins

The eastern edge of the world is wrapped in a lush mangrove swamp. The Goblins
live here, their tiny huts clustered together wherever solid ground is to be
had.

Goblins are short and wiry, with large, bald heads and exaggerated features –
their eyes, ears, and teeth seem far too large compared to the rest of their
bodies.

Goblins are devilishly fast. They are vicious hunters not because of tactics
or weapons, but because there is no creature that can outrun them, whether on
the ground or in the trees.

## Halflings

Between the forests of the Elves and the swamps of the Goblins lay the rolling
grasslands of the Halflings. Their small towns are surrounded by swaths of
tilled fields.

Halflings are a short folk with smooth, round cheeks. They sport curly hair on
their heads, as well as on the tops of their almost-always-bare feet.

Halflings are quiet artisans. Disinterested in danger and adventure, they are
content to farm their grains, brew their ales, and whittle their trinkets.

## Merfolk

Tiny mountain streams merge and interweave as they flow east across the
landscape, finally emptying into the sea. This watery network is the home of
the Merfolk.

Merfolk are an amphibious people with hairless blue-green skin and webbed
hands and feet. They wear little clothing, but tattoo themselves heavily.

Merfolk are merchants and ambassadors. They travel the waterways of the world,
brokering all manner of agreements between all manner of folk.

## Naga

On the opposite side of the world from the great mangrove swamp, the sea is
edged by desert cliffs. Upon these cliffs the Naga build their pyramid cities.

Naga are serpentfolk. Each part of their bodies is long and slender, from
their necks to their limbs to their tails. Their skin is bald and scaly, often
covered in beautiful patterns.

Naga are scholars and astrologers. They study the motions of the stars and
planets through cloudless desert skies, connecting their patterns to history
and the cycle of life and death.

## Orcs

The great desert runs from the western edge of the world to the central
mountains. It is home to the Orcs, hardy nomads who travel endlessly from
oasis to oasis.

Orcs are tall and broad, with heavy brows and jaws. Their skin color can be
anywhere from sandy brown to a dark green. Their dark hair is traditionally
tied tightly atop their heads.

Orcs are survivors. Their harsh desert home has made them strong and
resilient; their ability to endure hunger, thirst, and extreme temperature is
unparalleled.

## Satyrs

The mountain peaks are home to the Satyrs. On the eastern slopes, above the
forest, they grow their grapes; on the western slopes, above the sands, they
gather brush for their fires.

Satyrs are goatfolk, with cloven hooves and small horns above their ears.
Their legs are covered in short, coarse hair, which can also appear on their
arms and shoulders.

Satyrs are hedonistic revelers. They gather each night around their
mountaintop bonfires – from dusk until dawn they drink wine, dance, and put on
plays.
