03_creating_player_characters.md, before:

# Creating Player Characters

The most fundamental aspect of a PC is the **description**. This is a place for the player to keep track of their PC's background, personality, motivations, and any other details that might be used to guide the PC's actions during play.

Writing a PC's description can be a collaborative effort. Players are encouraged to talk to each other to figure out ideas for interesting backstories, relationships between the PCs, and what specifically has brought them together. The GM should be part of this discussion as well, in order to provide relevant details about the in-game world.... as well as to take note of people and places mentioned in the PCs' descriptions which may later be leveraged to create engaging plot hooks. 

The descriptions is also used to illustrate the equipment each PC carries. There is no formal handling of items or currency in Bloodlines, so the description is used to judge holistically whether a PC seems like they would carry lockpicks, a spyglass, an extra weapon, rope, and other gear.

Players have complete freedom over their PCs' descriptions. They may update them at any time in order to track important or unusual items, new relationships with NPCs, and so on.

A PC's description – in fact, everything on the PC's character sheet – is public information. It need not be hidden from other players or from the GM. There is one exception, however: if a PC is specifically withholding something from the other PCs, that player may withhold the same information from the other players. This is best done in anticipation of a dramatic reveal!

---

Each PC can sustain four **wounds**. Wounds are boxes on the character sheet which are marked off to indicate any sort of stress -- physical or mental -- inflicted on the PC. When all four are marked off, the PC is defeated. 

Physical wounds indicate bodily injury due to brawls, poisons, weapons, and so on. Defeat by physical wounds causes physical incapacitation. The PC may (per the GM's discretion) be conscious and able to speak, but they cannot move or defend themselves. Given the chance, any NPC can easily kill them. 

Mental wounds indicate damaged resolve, willpower, or self-control as a result of intimidation, provocation, or coercion. Defeat by mental wounds causes mental incapacitation. Depending on the situation (as judged by the GM) this may mean that the PC concedes an argument, breaks composure in a delicate social situation, or becomes so flustered that they can no longer form a coherent thought.

Physical and mental wounds are marked identically, using the same four boxes. It's rare that a single confrontation will cause both mental and physical stress. However, should a PC enter a physical confrontation before recovering from mental wounds, or vice versa, they will find that their fatigue carries over. 

Wounds are recovered in dramatically appropriate time. A short rest immediately after the confrontation is sufficient to unmark a single wound. All wounds are unmarked after a long rest, such as a hot meal or a night of sleep somewhere safe.

---

The bloodlines themselves are described as follows.

(Updated to here. -Charles)

-   **The Dwarf bloodline grants skill with weapons and tactics.** A high
    score  will improve a PC's rolls to attack with blades, bows, and any
    other sort of  weapon, as well as disarm, disable, and outmaneuver
    opponents. It also  defends against armed attackers – the GM may request a
    Dwarf roll for a PC  to deflect an incoming axe or sword.
-   **The Elf bloodline grants perceptiveness and an affinity with nature.** A
    high score will improve a PC's rolls to navigate without a map, track an
    NPC  through the wilds, handle animals, predict the weather, and forage
    for food  and water. It also defends against hidden dangers – the GM may
    request an  Elf roll for a PC to detect a trap or an impending ambush.
-   **The Goblin bloodline grants agility and reflexes.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to run, jump, and otherwise move rapidly. It also
    defends against projectiles – the GM may request a Goblin roll for a PC to
    quickly duck out of the way of an arrow or falling rock.
-   **The Halfling bloodline grants stealth and dexterity.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to pick locks, pick pockets, move silently through
    the  shadows, and travel without leaving a trail. It also defends against
    detection – the GM may request a Halfling roll for a PC to avoid being
    found  by NPCs.
-   **The Merfolk bloodline grants persuasiveness and willpower.** A high
    score  will improve a PC's rolls to barter, build rapport, and solicit
    aid, as well  as taunt and intimidate. It also defends against provocation
    – the GM may  request a Merfolk roll for a PC to maintain their composure
    when confronted  with a tense or coercive social situation.
-   **The Naga bloodline grants knowledge and experience.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to know history, nobility, monster descriptions, etc.
    It also defends against ignorance – the GM may request a Naga roll for for
    the PC to understand a language being spoken nearby, or to recall
    pertinent  lore about a specific monster or artifact.
-   **The Orc bloodline grants strength and endurance.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to kick down doors, lift heavy things, run long
    distances, and engage in grapples. It also defends against exposure – the
    GM  may request an Orc roll for a PC to resist the effects of poison, or
    to  persevere for days without food, water, or shelter.
-   **The Satyr bloodline grants skill at entertainment and deception.** A
    high  score will improve a PC's rolls to sing, dance, act, and play
    musical  instruments, as well as to lie, create disguises (for themselves
    or others),  and maintain false identities. It also defends against
    deception – the GM  may request a Satyr roll for a PC to judge an NPC's
    trustworthiness.

In addition to bloodline scores, a PC's ancestry also provides them with
**spells**. A spell is a whisper of the magical powers of the ancient peoples,
which can bubble up through a PC's hereditary memory. PCs do not begin with
any spells. They are gained between sessions as characters advance. They are
discussed in the next chapter.

## Example PC: Father Liam

Father Liam is described as follows:

> Father William "Liam" Ingebert Sweetleaf is the former headmaster of Madam
> Dolores's Orphanage in Threebridges. A trickster by nature, he was run out
> of the orphanage (and the town) after Madam Dolores herself discovered that
> he was training the children to be pickpockets.
>
> Since then, Father Liam has traveled the countryside surviving on his wits
> and ability to deceive. When entering a new community, he often creates a
> new persona and a disguise to go with it, using them to con people out of
> their possessions until he is – inevitably – discovered and run out of town
> again. He is currently traveling disguised as a priest and apothecary, and
> as such carries a thurible which he uses like a flail when the need arises.

Father Liam takes +2 to his Satyr bloodline to account for his deceptive
nature and his penchant for false identities. He also takes +1 to his Halfling
bloodline and +1 to his Elf bloodline – he was once a street-wise scoundrel,
after all.

In exchange, he takes -2 to his Orc bloodline, -1 to his Dwarf bloodline, and
-1 to his Goblin bloodline. He's never done an honest day of labor or training
in his life, and it's been a long time since he had to flee down a narrow
alleyway!

## Example PC: Galadhel

Galadhel is described as follows:

> Galadhel was born a bastard in the tiny village of Dragbor. Her mother
> always told her that she had Elven blood coursing through her veins, but
> Galadhel believed that this was a lie told to her to hide her father's
> identity and her mother's shame.
>
> She was a rambunctious child who took quickly to the bow and ran wild with
> the forest creatures. She clashed constantly with the elders of her village,
> as in Dragbor the authoritarian council prescribed the path of everyone's
> life from birth to death.

When they told her she must settle down to be a seamstress like her mother,
Galadhel instead fled from the village. With her new found freedom, she
decided to track down her absent father and join him in whatever adventures he
must be having.

Galadhel takes +2 to her Elf bloodline to demonstrate her natural affinity for
the woods and woodland creatures. She also takes +2 to her Dwarf bloodline to
explain her skill with a bow.

In exchange, she takes -2 each to her Merfolk and Satyr bloodlines. She is
hot-tempered and impatient, with nothing but contempt for those in positions
of authority.

## Example PC: Oxyehenhuain

Oxyehenhuain is described as follows:

> Oxyehenhuain was born in a large city along the edge of a wide waterway.
> Brought up under a strict caste structure, Oxye was selected at an early age
> to be trained as a diplomat and scholar. She excelled at both tasks,
> memorizing mountains of scrolls while learning nearly every language spoken
> on the continent.
>
> Oxye's life of quiet study was interrupted when an ill omen – a red comet –
> appeared in the night sky. Sensing that a massive change in the world was
> nigh, Oxye decided to venture out to discover what was wrong firsthand. With
> no experience of the outside world save for what she had read in ancient
> texts, Oxye crammed as many scrolls as would fit in her bag and headed out
> into the great wide world.

Oxyehenhuain takes +2 to her Merfolk bloodline to reflect her immaculate
manners and patient demeanor. She also takes +2 to her Naga bloodline – her
knowledge, particularly of the history and languages of the world, is
impressive.

In exchange, she takes -1 each to her Dwarf, Elf, Goblin, and Orc bloodlines.
Her studious life has done little to prepare her for the dangers found outside
of court.

## Example PC: Tor Byorn Yorgensen

Tor Byorn Yorgensen is described as follows:

> Tor Byorn Yorgensen is a sturdy young man from the mountains whose shoulders
> are impressively wide and whose arms and legs bulge with barely contained
> strength. Although he has a deep sense of honor and duty towards those who
> cannot defend themselves, he is bullheaded and has an abrasive personality
> that makes him difficult to get along with – so difficult in fact that he
> was exiled from his village and told not to return until he learned some
> manners.
>
> Ever since, Tor Byorn has survived by being too tough (and too stubborn) to
> die. He is never far from his two-handed hammer, with which he often charges
> in to fights that do not concern him to defend those he views as in need of
> help (whether they agree or not)!

Tor Byorn takes +2 to his Orc bloodline. He is built powerfully, and his time
wandering the wilderness has left him toughened. He also takes +2 to his Dwarf
bloodline, to show his proficiency with his hammer.

In exchange, he takes -2 each to his Satyr and Naga bloodlines – he's not one
for subtlety, or for books.

Commit message:

Started updating sample PCs
Updated a few words here and there.

Do PCs get spells at character creation? If so, obviously, we can't finish sample PCs until spells exist.

Starting each bloodline at 4, then being able to move 4 points, is A TON. You end up with really serious weaknesses. I think some sample PCs should move fewer... 3 or even just 2.

03_creating_player_characters.md, after:

# Creating Player Characters

The most fundamental aspect of a PC is the **description**. This is a place for the player to keep track of their PC's background, personality, motivations, and any other details that might be used to guide the PC's actions during play.

Writing a PC's description can be a collaborative effort. Players are encouraged to talk to each other to figure out ideas for interesting backstories, relationships between the PCs, and what specifically has brought them together. The GM should be part of this discussion as well, in order to provide relevant details about the in-game world.... as well as to take note of people and places mentioned in the PCs' descriptions which may later be leveraged to create engaging plot hooks. 

The descriptions is also used to illustrate the equipment each PC carries. There is no formal handling of items or currency in Bloodlines, so the description is used to judge holistically whether a PC seems like they would carry lockpicks, a spyglass, an extra weapon, rope, and other gear.

Players have complete freedom over their PCs' descriptions. They may update them at any time in order to track important or unusual items, new relationships with NPCs, and so on.

A PC's description – in fact, everything on the PC's character sheet – is public information. It need not be hidden from other players or from the GM. There is one exception, however: if a PC is specifically withholding something from the other PCs, that player may withhold the same information from the other players. This is best done in anticipation of a dramatic reveal!

---

Each PC can sustain four **wounds**. Wounds are boxes on the character sheet which are marked off to indicate any sort of stress -- physical or mental -- inflicted on the PC. When all four are marked off, the PC is defeated. 

Physical wounds indicate bodily injury due to brawls, poisons, weapons, and so on. Defeat by physical wounds causes physical incapacitation. The PC may (per the GM's discretion) be conscious and able to speak, but they cannot move or defend themselves. Given the chance, any NPC can easily kill them. 

Mental wounds indicate damaged resolve, willpower, or self-control as a result of intimidation, provocation, or coercion. Defeat by mental wounds causes mental incapacitation. Depending on the situation (as judged by the GM) this may mean that the PC concedes an argument, breaks composure in a delicate social situation, or becomes so flustered that they can no longer form a coherent thought.

Physical and mental wounds are marked identically, using the same four boxes. It's rare that a single confrontation will cause both mental and physical stress. However, should a PC enter a physical confrontation before recovering from mental wounds, or vice versa, they will find that their fatigue carries over. 

Wounds are recovered in dramatically appropriate time. A short rest immediately after the confrontation is sufficient to unmark a single wound. All wounds are unmarked after a long rest, such as a hot meal or a night of sleep somewhere safe.

---

The bloodlines themselves are described as follows.

(Bloodline descriptions are not yet updated, obviously. -Charles)

-   **The Dwarf bloodline grants skill with weapons and tactics.** A high
    score  will improve a PC's rolls to attack with blades, bows, and any
    other sort of  weapon, as well as disarm, disable, and outmaneuver
    opponents. It also  defends against armed attackers – the GM may request a
    Dwarf roll for a PC  to deflect an incoming axe or sword.
-   **The Elf bloodline grants perceptiveness and an affinity with nature.** A
    high score will improve a PC's rolls to navigate without a map, track an
    NPC  through the wilds, handle animals, predict the weather, and forage
    for food  and water. It also defends against hidden dangers – the GM may
    request an  Elf roll for a PC to detect a trap or an impending ambush.
-   **The Goblin bloodline grants agility and reflexes.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to run, jump, and otherwise move rapidly. It also
    defends against projectiles – the GM may request a Goblin roll for a PC to
    quickly duck out of the way of an arrow or falling rock.
-   **The Halfling bloodline grants stealth and dexterity.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to pick locks, pick pockets, move silently through
    the  shadows, and travel without leaving a trail. It also defends against
    detection – the GM may request a Halfling roll for a PC to avoid being
    found  by NPCs.
-   **The Merfolk bloodline grants persuasiveness and willpower.** A high
    score  will improve a PC's rolls to barter, build rapport, and solicit
    aid, as well  as taunt and intimidate. It also defends against provocation
    – the GM may  request a Merfolk roll for a PC to maintain their composure
    when confronted  with a tense or coercive social situation.
-   **The Naga bloodline grants knowledge and experience.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to know history, nobility, monster descriptions, etc.
    It also defends against ignorance – the GM may request a Naga roll for for
    the PC to understand a language being spoken nearby, or to recall
    pertinent  lore about a specific monster or artifact.
-   **The Orc bloodline grants strength and endurance.** A high score will
    improve a PC's rolls to kick down doors, lift heavy things, run long
    distances, and engage in grapples. It also defends against exposure – the
    GM  may request an Orc roll for a PC to resist the effects of poison, or
    to  persevere for days without food, water, or shelter.
-   **The Satyr bloodline grants skill at entertainment and deception.** A
    high  score will improve a PC's rolls to sing, dance, act, and play
    musical  instruments, as well as to lie, create disguises (for themselves
    or others),  and maintain false identities. It also defends against
    deception – the GM  may request a Satyr roll for a PC to judge an NPC's
    trustworthiness.

---

In addition to bloodline scores, a PC's ancestry also provides them with
**spells**. A spell is a whisper of the magical powers of the ancient peoples,
which can bubble up through a PC's hereditary memory. PCs do not begin with
any spells. They are gained between sessions as characters advance. They are
discussed in the next chapter.

## Example PC: Father Liam

Father Liam is described as follows:

> Father William "Liam" Ingebert Sweetleaf is the former headmaster of Madam
> Dolores's Orphanage in Threebridges. A trickster by nature, he was run out
> of the orphanage (and the town) after Madam Dolores herself discovered that
> he was training the children to be pickpockets.
>
> Since then, Father Liam has traveled the countryside surviving on his wits
> and ability to deceive. When entering a new community, he often creates a
> new persona and a disguise to go with it, using them to con people out of
> their possessions until he is – inevitably – discovered and run out of town
> again. He is currently traveling disguised as a priest and apothecary, ready to dispense his particular brand of aid to those in need.

Father Liam takes +2 to his Halfling bloodline to account for his deceptive nature and his penchant for false identities. He also takes +1 to his Goblin bloodline – he was once a street-wise scoundrel,
after all. In exchange, he takes -3 to his Dwarf bloodline. Father Liam has never done an honest day of work in his life!

(Do PCs start with a spell? -Charles)

## Example PC: Galadhel

Galadhel is described as follows:

> Galadhel was born a bastard in the tiny village of Dragbor. Her mother
> always told her that she had Elven blood coursing through her veins, but
> Galadhel believed that this was a lie told to her to hide her father's
> identity and her mother's shame.
>
> She was a rambunctious child who took quickly to the bow and ran wild with
> the forest creatures. She clashed constantly with the elders of her village,
> as in Dragbor the authoritarian council prescribed the path of everyone's
> life from birth to death.

> When they told her she must settle down to be a seamstress like her mother,
Galadhel instead fled from the village. With her new found freedom, she
decided to track down her absent father and join him in whatever adventures he
must be having. 

Galadhel takes +2 to her Elf bloodline to demonstrate her natural affinity for
the woods and woodland creatures. She also takes +2 to her Goblin bloodline to
explain her skill with a bow.

In exchange, she takes -2 each to her Merfolk and Satyr bloodlines. She is
hot-tempered and impatient, with nothing but contempt for those in positions
of authority.

## Example PC: Oxyehenhuain

Oxyehenhuain is described as follows:

> Oxyehenhuain was born in a large city along the edge of a wide waterway.
> Brought up under a strict caste structure, Oxye was selected at an early age
> to be trained as a diplomat and scholar. She excelled at both tasks,
> memorizing mountains of scrolls while learning nearly every language spoken
> on the continent.
>
> Oxye's life of quiet study was interrupted when an ill omen – a red comet –
> appeared in the night sky. Sensing that a massive change in the world was
> nigh, Oxye decided to venture out to discover what was wrong firsthand. With
> no experience of the outside world save for what she had read in ancient
> texts, Oxye crammed as many scrolls as would fit in her bag and headed out
> into the great wide world.

Oxyehenhuain takes +2 to her Merfolk bloodline to reflect her immaculate
manners and patient demeanor. She also takes +2 to her Naga bloodline – her
knowledge, particularly of the history and languages of the world, is
impressive.

In exchange, she takes -1 each to her Dwarf, Elf, Goblin, and Orc bloodlines.
Her studious life has done little to prepare her for the dangers found outside
of court.

## Example PC: Tor Byorn Yorgensen

Tor Byorn Yorgensen is described as follows:

> Tor Byorn Yorgensen is a sturdy young man from the mountains whose shoulders
> are impressively wide and whose arms and legs bulge with barely contained
> strength. Although he has a deep sense of honor and duty towards those who
> cannot defend themselves, he is bullheaded and has an abrasive personality
> that makes him difficult to get along with – so difficult in fact that he
> was exiled from his village and told not to return until he learned some
> manners.
>
> Ever since, Tor Byorn has survived by being too tough (and too stubborn) to
> die. He is never far from his two-handed hammer, with which he often charges
> in to fights that do not concern him to defend those he views as in need of
> help (whether they agree or not)!

Tor Byorn takes +2 to his Orc bloodline. He is built powerfully, and his time
wandering the wilderness has left him toughened. He also takes +2 to his Dwarf
bloodline, to show his proficiency with his hammer.

In exchange, he takes -2 each to his Satyr and Naga bloodlines – he's not one
for subtlety, or for books.
