03_player_characters.md, before:

# Player Characters

**What is a PC?**

**Point to Appendix I, which has sample PCs**

**It's awkward to have sample PCs not introduced until the appendix... we want to be able to use them to explain things now!**

A PC's character sheet is public; it need not be hidden from the GM or from the other players. There is one exception, however. If a PC is specifically withholding a piece of information from the other PCs, that information may be withheld from the other players as well. This is best done in anticipation of a dramatic reveal!


## Description

The most fundamental aspect of a PC is the description. This is a place for the player to keep track of their PC's background, personality, motivations, and any other details that might be used to guide the PC's actions during play. 

Players are encouraged to talk to each other to figure out ideas for interesting backstories, relationships between the PCs, and what specifically has brought them together. The GM should be part of this discussion as well, in order to provide relevant details about the in-game world.... as well as to take note of people and places mentioned in the PCs' descriptions which may later be leveraged to create engaging plot hooks. 

A PC's description is used to eyeball the sorts of equipment a PC carries. There is no formal handling of items or currency in Bloodlines. If the PCs find themselves wanting lockpicks, a spyglass, some rope, or a disguise kit, they'll need to assess whether it would make sense for any of them to be carrying such a thing. 

Players have complete freedom over their PCs' descriptions. They may update them at any time in order to note important or unusual items, new relationships with NPCs, and so on. 

## Bloodline Scores

PCs are Human, and as such their abilities can be expressed in terms of their four bloodline scores. These are numbers which illustrate how well the PC embodies the strengths of the four ancient peoples. A Human whose Elf bloodline manifests strongly will be innately perceptive, for example, while one whose Goblin bloodline is strong will be agile and coordinated. 

During play, these scores give the number of dice that players use to make rolls. A higher score indicates that a PC manifests that bloodline more strongly, and as a result will be more adept at actions related to that bloodline. 

It bears noting that just because a PC would be good at rolling for something, doesn't mean that they should feel obligated to do that thing. For example, the Halfling bloodline is used for both persuasion and deceit. If a player envisions their PC as persuasive, but not as a natural liar, they should simply not have their PC lie! The same would be true of a sneaky PC with no talent for shooting; that PC probably doesn't carry a bow, and would generally have no reason to be shooting at all, despite the fact that their strong Goblin bloodline would (in principle) make them good at it. Such weaknesses are not strictly necessary, but many players find that they add depth to a PC's character. 

Each bloodline score begins at a value of 5. In order to demonstrate strengths and weaknesses, the player may then decrease a score by one in order to increase another score by one. This may be done up to four times. For example, to create a PC who is tough and charming, but clumsy and dim-witted, a player may increment their Dwarf and Halfling scores to 7 at the cost of decreasing their Elf and Goblin scores to 3. 

At the end of each session, each player may permanently increase any one of their PC's bloodline scores by 1. (If they choose not to increase a bloodline score, the PC instead learns a spell, as discussed in a moment.) 

The bloodlines are described as follows:

-   The Dwarf bloodline imparts strength, endurance, and skill-at-arms. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to grapple, brawl, kick down doors, run long distances, and use swords, axes, spears, and other hand-to-hand weapons. It also defends against melee attackers and exposure to the elements – the GM may request a Dwarf roll for a PC to deflect a grapple, parry an incoming sword, or stomach a poison.
-   The Elf bloodline imparts knowledge, perceptiveness, and natural affinity. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to forage, track, handle animals, make educated guesses, and recall facts about history, monsters, and geography. It also defends against ignorance and hidden dangers – the GM may request an Elf roll for a PC to notice an impending ambush, to recall a pertinent detail about an NPC, or to understand a new language being spoken nearby.
-   The Goblin bloodline imparts reflexes, coordination, and stealthiness. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to pick locks, pick pockets, move silently, and attack with ranged and thrown weapons. It also defends against detection and against projectiles – the GM may request a Goblin roll for a PC to remain hidden despite pursuers, or to duck out of the way of an incoming arrow or falling rock. 
-   The Halfling bloodline imparts social savvy, charisma, and willpower. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to provoke, intimidate, barter, build rapport, entertain, create disguises, and lie. It also defends against deception and coercion – the GM may call for a Halfling roll for a PC to judge an NPC's trustworthiness, or maintain composure when faced with a tense or confrontational social situation.

## Spells

In addition to bloodline scores, a PC's ancestry also provides them with
spells. A spell is a whisper of the magical powers of the ancient peoples,
which can bubble up through a PC's hereditary memory. 

All PCs have access to spells, but it bears noting that they are otherwise
rare. Most humans never know a spell; many never even meet someone who does.
Learning a new spell is always an event of note... though different sects of
Humanity disagree about which spells are good omens and which are bad.

**How do you gain spells?**

**How do you use spells?**

**Point to Appendix III, which is a list of sample spells.**

**Either here or in the appendix, note that spells are in-world abilities that don't explicitly deal with dice, though you can be called to roll while using them.**

## Wounds

Each PC can sustain four wounds. Wounds are boxes on the character sheet which are marked off to indicate any sort of stress – physical or mental – inflicted on the PC. When all four are marked off, the PC is defeated. 

Physical wounds indicate bodily injury due to brawls, poisons, weapons, and so on. Defeat by physical wounds causes physical incapacitation. The PC may (per the GM's discretion) be conscious and able to speak, but they cannot move or defend themselves. Given the chance, any NPC can easily kill them. 

Mental wounds indicate damaged resolve, willpower, or self-control as a result of intimidation, provocation, or coercion. Defeat by mental wounds causes mental incapacitation. Depending on the situation (as judged by the GM) this may mean that the PC concedes an argument, breaks composure in a delicate social situation, or becomes so flustered that they can no longer form a coherent thought.

Physical and mental wounds are marked identically, using the same four boxes. It's rare that a single confrontation will cause both mental and physical stress. However, should a PC enter a physical confrontation before recovering from mental wounds, or vice versa, they will find that their fatigue carries over. 

Wounds are recovered in dramatically appropriate time. A short rest immediately after the confrontation is sufficient to unmark a single wound. All wounds are unmarked after a long rest, such as a hot meal or a night of sleep somewhere safe.

Commit message:

Explained where spells come from
PCs level up at the START of each session, not the end. This lets you choose a bonus and then use it immediately, which is probably fun. It also means that you can take a spell right away if you want. 

Next up: for the sample PCs, include the first level up.

03_player_characters.md, after:

# Player Characters

**What is a PC?**

**Point to Appendix I, which has sample PCs**

A PC's character sheet is public; it need not be hidden from the GM or from the other players. There is one exception, however. If a PC is specifically withholding a piece of information from the other PCs, that information may be withheld from the other players as well. This is best done in anticipation of a dramatic reveal!

## Description

The most fundamental aspect of a PC is the description. This is a place for the player to keep track of their PC's background, personality, motivations, and any other details that might be used to guide the PC's actions during play. 

Players are encouraged to talk to each other to figure out ideas for interesting backstories, relationships between the PCs, and what specifically has brought them together. The GM should be part of this discussion as well, in order to provide relevant details about the in-game world.... as well as to take note of people and places mentioned in the PCs' descriptions which may later be leveraged to create engaging plot hooks. 

A PC's description is used to eyeball the sorts of equipment a PC carries. There is no formal handling of items or currency in Bloodlines. If the PCs find themselves wanting lockpicks, a spyglass, some rope, or a disguise kit, they'll need to assess whether it would make sense for any of them to be carrying such a thing. 

Players have complete freedom over their PCs' descriptions. They may update them at any time in order to note important or unusual items, new relationships with NPCs, and so on. 

## Bloodline Scores

PCs are Human, and as such their abilities can be expressed in terms of their four bloodline scores. These are numbers which illustrate how well the PC embodies the strengths of the four ancient peoples. A Human whose Elf bloodline manifests strongly will be innately perceptive, for example, while one whose Goblin bloodline is strong will be agile and coordinated. 

During play, these scores give the number of dice that players use to make rolls. A higher score indicates that a PC manifests that bloodline more strongly, and as a result will be more adept at actions related to that bloodline. 

It bears noting that just because a PC would be good at rolling for something, doesn't mean that they should feel obligated to do that thing. For example, the Halfling bloodline is used for both persuasion and deceit. If a player envisions their PC as persuasive, but not as a natural liar, they should simply not have their PC lie! The same would be true of a sneaky PC with no talent for shooting; that PC probably doesn't carry a bow, and would generally have no reason to be shooting at all, despite the fact that their strong Goblin bloodline would (in principle) make them good at it. Such weaknesses are not strictly necessary, but many players find that they add depth to a PC's character. 

Each bloodline score begins at a value of 5. In order to demonstrate strengths and weaknesses, the player may then decrease a score by one in order to increase another score by one. This may be done up to four times. For example, to create a PC who is tough and charming, but clumsy and dim-witted, a player may increment their Dwarf and Halfling scores to 7 at the cost of decreasing their Elf and Goblin scores to 3. 

At the beginning of each session, each player may permanently increase any one of their PC's bloodline scores by 1. (If they choose not to increase a bloodline score, the PC instead learns a spell, as discussed in a moment.) This includes the first session – the first increase usually happens just after creating the PC.

The bloodlines are described as follows:

-   **The Dwarf bloodline imparts strength, endurance, and skill-at-arms.** A high score will improve a PC's rolls to grapple, brawl, kick down doors, run long distances, and use swords, axes, spears, and other hand-to-hand weapons. It also defends against melee attackers and exposure to the elements – the GM may request a Dwarf roll for a PC to deflect a grapple, parry an incoming sword, or stomach a poison.
-   **The Elf bloodline imparts knowledge, perceptiveness, and natural affinity.** A high score will improve a PC's rolls to forage, track, handle animals, make educated guesses, and recall facts about history, monsters, and geography. It also defends against ignorance and hidden dangers – the GM may request an Elf roll for a PC to notice an impending ambush, to recall a pertinent detail about an NPC, or to understand a new language being spoken nearby.
-   **The Goblin bloodline imparts reflexes, coordination, and stealthiness.** A high score will improve a PC's rolls to pick locks, pick pockets, move silently, and attack with ranged and thrown weapons. It also defends against detection and against projectiles – the GM may request a Goblin roll for a PC to remain hidden despite pursuers, or to duck out of the way of an incoming arrow or falling rock. 
-   **The Halfling bloodline imparts social savvy, charisma, and willpower.** A high score will improve a PC's rolls to provoke, intimidate, barter, build rapport, entertain, create disguises, and lie. It also defends against deception and coercion – the GM may call for a Halfling roll for a PC to judge an NPC's trustworthiness, or maintain composure when faced with a tense or confrontational social situation.

## Spells

In addition to bloodline scores, a PC's ancestry also provides them with
spells. A spell is a whisper of the magical powers of the ancient peoples,
which can bubble up through a PC's hereditary memory. 

All PCs have access to spells, but it bears noting that they are otherwise
rare. Most humans never know a spell; many never even meet someone who does.
Learning a new spell is always an event of note... though different sects of
Humanity disagree about which spells are good omens and which are bad.

At the beginning of each play session, if a player chooses not in increase one of their PC's bloodline scores, that PC instead learns a spell. Any PC is able to learn any spell, regardless of what spells they already know, and regardless of what their corresponding bloodline scores are. 

It bears noting that a PC will be most effective in using a spell if their corresponding bloodline score is high. Should the GM call for a roll as part of using a Dwarf spell, for example, that roll will always be made with the Dwarf bloodline score. This is discussed more fully in the next chapter.

Players can choose spells from the spell list in the Appendix. In addition, GMs are encouraged to write their own spells; the Appendix also includes advive to help in this endeavor. 

## Wounds

Each PC can sustain four wounds. Wounds are boxes on the character sheet which are marked off to indicate any sort of stress – physical or mental – inflicted on the PC. When all four are marked off, the PC is defeated. 

Physical wounds indicate bodily injury due to brawls, poisons, weapons, and so on. Defeat by physical wounds causes physical incapacitation. The PC may (per the GM's discretion) be conscious and able to speak, but they cannot move or defend themselves. Given the chance, any NPC can easily kill them. 

Mental wounds indicate damaged resolve, willpower, or self-control as a result of intimidation, provocation, or coercion. Defeat by mental wounds causes mental incapacitation. Depending on the situation (as judged by the GM) this may mean that the PC concedes an argument, breaks composure in a delicate social situation, or becomes so flustered that they can no longer form a coherent thought.

Physical and mental wounds are marked identically, using the same four boxes. It's rare that a single confrontation will cause both mental and physical stress. However, should a PC enter a physical confrontation before recovering from mental wounds, or vice versa, they will find that their fatigue carries over. 

Wounds are recovered in dramatically appropriate time. A short rest immediately after the confrontation is sufficient to unmark a single wound. All wounds are unmarked after a long rest, such as a hot meal or a night of sleep somewhere safe.
