03_pcs.md, before:

# Player Characters

*PCs are characters played by players. In contrast, NPCs are played by the GM. They get their own chapter later.*

## Title

*It shouldn't just be a name. Keep in mind that your PC has just been teamed up with strangers from half a world away. What makes you memorable? Perhaps a long family name? a distinguishing physical characteristic? your attitude? Where you are from?*

## Foundation

A PC's foundation is a set of four glimpses into the PC's life. They are not meant to be a full back story... just a handful of snippets to ground where the PC comes from, and who they are. Keep in mind that a PC's most exciting adventures lie ahead of them! 

Prior to being conscripted as an adventurer, each PC had a **Trade**: building, baking, logging, and so on. In fact, they likely had little else; the hard frontier life doesn't leave much time for hobby pursuits. A PC's trade hints at the sorts of tools they might carry, what NPCs they might naturally relate to, what problem-solving approaches come naturally to them, and so on. 

Each PC's life changed with the manifestation of their **Power**. This whisper of magical ability, held over from the old peoples, set them undeniably apart from the rest of Humanity. The Appendix lists several example powers, and also gives guidelines from which players can work with each other and the GM to come up with their own. 

*Service. When your power manifested, you were drafted as an adventurer. On behalf of all of humanity, you explore the unknown and confront the dangers that live there. What onus, specifically, had been placed upon you? You should work with your group to figure these out. Not everyone needs to have the same task, but they should at least fit together. The PCs need to all share the story with one another, after all.*

*Ethos. Even if you dreamed of being an adventurer, nothing in your life could have truly prepared you for it. How have you reacted? Do you embrace your new responsibility or resent it? What sort of world are you working to build for humanity? This is something you should talk to your GM and other players about, though you don't need to agree on everything -- disagreement can lead to interesting party dynamics!*

## Bloodline Scores

Each PC has four bloodline scores which illustrate how well the PC (as  Human) embodies the abilities of the four ancient peoples, as well as how favorably they are seen by those peoples' patron deities. A PC whose Elf bloodline is strong will be sharp-eyed, for example, and will take naturally to the magical domains of Aso and Osa. A strong Goblin bloodline, on the other hand, indicates a PC who is innately agile and looked upon favorably by Opochi.

During play, bloodline scores indicate the number of dice that players use to make rolls. A higher bloodline score causes a player to roll more dice, which in turn improves the PC's odds of success in actions related to that score. Examples of the sorts of actions relevant to each score follow:

+ The **Dwarf** bloodline imparts strength, endurance, and skill-at-arms. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to grapple, kick down doors, stomach poisons, run long distances, and fight with hand-to-hand weapons. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Dwarf goddess, Valka, who controls magic related to fire, metal, and stone.
+ The **Elf** bloodline imparts knowledge, perceptiveness, and natural affinity. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to forage, track, handle animals, make educated guesses, and recall facts about history, monsters, and geography. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Elf deities Aso and Osa, who control magic related to plants, animals, and time.
+ The **Goblin** bloodline imparts reflexes, coordination, and stealthiness. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to pick locks, pick pockets, move silently, and attack with ranged and thrown weapons. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Goblin god, Opochi, who controls magic related to seas and storms.
+ The **Halfling** bloodline imparts social savvy, charisma, and willpower. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to provoke, barter, parley, build rapport, entertain, create disguises, and lie. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Halfling goddess, Dina, who controls magic related to charms and illusions.

Over the course of their adventures, a PC's bloodline scores gradually increase. This indicates the PC becoming stronger and more clever as a result of their experiences, as well as earning divine favor by amusing the gods. The gods are capricious, however, so bloodline scores sometimes fluctuate unpredictably.

Bloodline scores are set at the beginning of each session. To do so, each player rolls twenty four-sided dice, plus an additional one for each session that's been played. That is, twenty-one dice are rolled at the beginning of the second session, twenty-two at the beginning of the third session, and so on. If any numbers do not show up (no dice show "3", for example), the roll must be tried again.

The dice are divided into four piles by value. The sizes of the four piles are then assigned to the PC's bloodline scores. Note that the relative order of the scores should remain unchanged from session to session.

> At the beginning of the first session, twenty four-sided dice are rolled to determine Tor Byorn's bloodline scores. The result is 4 dice showing "1," 7 dice showing "2," 3 dice showing "3," and 6 dice showing "4." That means that his four bloodline scores are 4, 7, 3, and 6. He assigns his highest score (7) to Dwarf, his second-highest (6) to Halfling, his third-highest (4) to Goblin, and his lowest (3) to Elf.

> At the beginning of the second session, twenty-one dice are rolled, resulting in 3 dice showing "1," 5 dice showing "2," 5 dice showing "3," and 8 dice showing "4." That means that his four bloodline scores are 3, 5, 5, and 8. He assigns them in the same order as before: Dwarf 8, Halfling 5, Goblin 5, and Elf 3.

## Conditions

Each PC has four checkboxes which are marked as they suffer injury. Each box corresponds to one of the four bloodline scores. As long as a given box is checked, rolls of the corresponding score will be more difficult: 

+ While the **Broken** condition is checked, a PC's Dwarf rolls will be more difficult. 
+ While the **Dazed** condition is checked, a PC's Elf rolls will be more difficult. 
+ While the **Unsteady** condition is checked, a PC's Goblin rolls will be more difficult. 
+ While the **Shaken** condition is checked, a PC's Halfling rolls will be more difficult. 

The next chapter illustrates in detail how these boxes become checked, how they become unchecked, and what happens when a PC runs out of checkboxes. 

## Notes

*This is a large blank space at the bottom of the character sheet. It's meant for anything that the player wants to note as they play. It will likely start out empty, then accumulate little bits over time.*

*This is a place to mark unusual items carried, relationships with NPCs, memorable exploits, rumors gathered from NPCs, thoughts to be referenced later, etc. This section doesn't have a mechanical effect – it exists to help add color.*

Commit message:

wrote foundation. working on title.

03_pcs.md, after:

# Player Characters

*PCs are characters played by players. In contrast, NPCs are played by the GM. They get their own chapter later.*

## Title

Each PC is at once an embodiment of Humanity's heritage and a beacon of hope for its future. The common folk view them with a mixture of reverence and apprehension. Such a larger-then-life figure can hardly have an ordinary name! 

*It shouldn't just be a name. Keep in mind that your PC has just been teamed up with strangers from half a world away. What makes them memorable? Perhaps a long family name? a distinguishing physical characteristic? an attitude? a place of origin?*

## Foundation

A PC's foundation is a set of four glimpses into the PC's life. They are not meant to be a full back story... just a handful of snippets to ground where the PC comes from, and who they are. Players should consider the following prompts when writing their PCs' foundations. It's also important to keep in mind that a PC's most exciting adventures lie ahead of them! 

Before enlisting as an adventurer, each PC had a **Trade**. Perhaps they were a builder, a logger, an innkeep, or a farmer. It's likely that this profession was central to their identity; the hard frontier life leaves little room for hobby pursuits. A PC's Trade hints at the sorts of tools they might carry, what NPCs they might naturally relate to, what problem-solving approaches come naturally to them, and so on. 

Each PC's life changed with the manifestation of their **Power**. While such a power is just a whisper of the old peoples' magical abilities, it is enough to set a PC apart, unambiguously, from the rest of Humanity. The Appendix lists several example Powers, and also provides guideline from which players can work with each other and the GM to create their own. 

Adventurers are pressed into **Service** for the sake of all Humanity. Their missions are dangerous – the recovery of powerful artifacts, the exploration of ancient ruins, or the capture of magical creatures, for instance – and often push past the bounds of Human knowledge. Players should work with the GM and each other to establish their Service, keeping in mind that all of the PCs need to belong in the same story! 

A PC may have dreamed of becoming an adventurer, but nothing in their life could truly have prepared them for it. Their **Ethos** reflects how they have reacted. Does the PC embrace their newfound responsibility, or resent those who placed it upon them? What sort of future do they want to help build for Humanity? 

A PC's Trade and Power do not change over time. That said, if a player realizes after a few sessions that they're unsatisfied with the PC they've created, they should talk to the GM about retconning a detail or two. On the other hand, a PC's Service and Ethos may well change over the course of a campaign. Revisions can arise from the PCs' discovery of new information, a new assignment after a completed quest, a PC's personal development, and so on. 

## Bloodline Scores

Each PC has four bloodline scores which illustrate how well the PC (as  Human) embodies the abilities of the four ancient peoples, as well as how favorably they are seen by those peoples' patron deities. A PC whose Elf bloodline is strong will be sharp-eyed, for example, and will take naturally to the magical domains of Aso and Osa. A strong Goblin bloodline, on the other hand, indicates a PC who is innately agile and looked upon favorably by Opochi.

During play, bloodline scores indicate the number of dice that players use to make rolls. A higher bloodline score causes a player to roll more dice, which in turn improves the PC's odds of success in actions related to that score. Examples of the sorts of actions relevant to each score follow:

+ The **Dwarf** bloodline imparts strength, endurance, and skill-at-arms. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to grapple, kick down doors, stomach poisons, run long distances, and fight with hand-to-hand weapons. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Dwarf goddess, Valka, who controls magic related to fire, metal, and stone.
+ The **Elf** bloodline imparts knowledge, perceptiveness, and natural affinity. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to forage, track, handle animals, make educated guesses, and recall facts about history, monsters, and geography. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Elf deities Aso and Osa, who control magic related to plants, animals, and time.
+ The **Goblin** bloodline imparts reflexes, coordination, and stealthiness. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to pick locks, pick pockets, move silently, and attack with ranged and thrown weapons. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Goblin god, Opochi, who controls magic related to seas and storms.
+ The **Halfling** bloodline imparts social savvy, charisma, and willpower. A high score will improve a PC's rolls to provoke, barter, parley, build rapport, entertain, create disguises, and lie. It also indicates a PC's connection to the Halfling goddess, Dina, who controls magic related to charms and illusions.

Over the course of their adventures, a PC's bloodline scores gradually increase. This indicates the PC becoming stronger and more clever as a result of their experiences, as well as earning divine favor by amusing the gods. The gods are capricious, however, so bloodline scores sometimes fluctuate unpredictably.

Bloodline scores are set at the beginning of each session. To do so, each player rolls twenty four-sided dice, plus an additional one for each session that's been played. That is, twenty-one dice are rolled at the beginning of the second session, twenty-two at the beginning of the third session, and so on. If any numbers do not show up (no dice show "3", for example), the roll must be tried again.

The dice are divided into four piles by value. The sizes of the four piles are then assigned to the PC's bloodline scores. Note that the relative order of the scores should remain unchanged from session to session.

> At the beginning of the first session, twenty four-sided dice are rolled to determine Tor Byorn's bloodline scores. The result is 4 dice showing "1," 7 dice showing "2," 3 dice showing "3," and 6 dice showing "4." That means that his four bloodline scores are 4, 7, 3, and 6. He assigns his highest score (7) to Dwarf, his second-highest (6) to Halfling, his third-highest (4) to Goblin, and his lowest (3) to Elf.

> At the beginning of the second session, twenty-one dice are rolled, resulting in 3 dice showing "1," 5 dice showing "2," 5 dice showing "3," and 8 dice showing "4." That means that his four bloodline scores are 3, 5, 5, and 8. He assigns them in the same order as before: Dwarf 8, Halfling 5, Goblin 5, and Elf 3.

## Conditions

Each PC has four checkboxes which are marked as they suffer injury. Each box corresponds to one of the four bloodline scores. As long as a given box is checked, rolls of the corresponding score will be more difficult: 

+ While the **Broken** condition is checked, a PC's Dwarf rolls will be more difficult. 
+ While the **Dazed** condition is checked, a PC's Elf rolls will be more difficult. 
+ While the **Unsteady** condition is checked, a PC's Goblin rolls will be more difficult. 
+ While the **Shaken** condition is checked, a PC's Halfling rolls will be more difficult. 

The next chapter illustrates in detail how these boxes become checked, how they become unchecked, and what happens when a PC runs out of checkboxes. 

## Notes

*This is a large blank space at the bottom of the character sheet. It's meant for anything that the player wants to note as they play. It will likely start out empty, then accumulate little bits over time.*

*This is a place to mark unusual items carried, relationships with NPCs, memorable exploits, rumors gathered from NPCs, thoughts to be referenced later, etc. This section doesn't have a mechanical effect – it exists to help add color.*
