# Advancing Player Characters

As PCs undergo ever-more heroic trials, their bloodlines in turn manifest more
and more strongly. In addition, PCs may find themselves developing magical
abilities as spells bubble up through their hereditary memory.

After each session, a player may **permanently increase any one of their PC's
boodline scores** by 1. It's most appropriate to increase a score that was
used more than usual in the most recent session â€“ bartering with NPCs can
serve to strengthen the Merfolk bloodline, for example, and enduring harsh
environments can strengthen the Orc bloodline.

Instead of incrementing a bloodline score, a player may have their PC **learn
a single spell**. Learning a spell represents a small amount of magical
ability expressing itself through the PC. Spells cannot be taught; they must
arise naturally.

Each spell is a word. To cast the spell, the PC need only say the word, or
even hold it at the forefront of their mind. This can be done at any time.

While all PCs have access to spells, it bears noting that they are otherwise
rare. Most humans never know a spell; many never even meet someone who does.
Learning a new spell is always an event of note... though different sects of
Humanity disagree about which spells are good omens and which are bad.

The next pages list several example spells for each people.  Additionally, GMs
are encouraged to add their own in order to further illustrate the world the
PCs live in. It should be noted, however, that spells follow a specific
template:

Spells are in-world abilities intended to encourage open-ended, immersive
play. They do not deal explicitly with dice or bloodline scores. No rolls are
required to use them, though a player may still be prompted for a roll during
a spell's duration. For example, a spell may allow a PC to reshape stone as if
it were clay, but sculpting that stone into a particularly delicate form may
require a Halfling roll.

In fact, using a spell to make otherwise-impossible rolls is the whole point.
PCs can already do (or at least attempt) anything conceivable for a human;
spells add the ability to attempt things which are emphatically superhuman.

## Dwarf Spells

## Elf Spells

## Goblin spells

## Halfling spells
