04_action_resolution.md, before:

# Action resolution

(This chapter is a mess. I'm working on it. -Charles)

The success and failure of PC actions are judged by die rolls. The following rules lay out when and how to do so.

**The PCs are expected to be the driving force behind the story. They should be active, not reactive. That's why only players roll.**

**Only roll when there are two interesting options. Examples of interesting failures:**
- **cultists in the sewer. who sees who first?**
- **disarming a trap. do you trip it?**
- **trying to talk past a guard. he might yell for backup**

**Failure is bad for the PCs but still good for the story.**

**auto-success is great, should be common**

**auto-fail is not great, is allowed, but should be rare.**

**Story trumps realism**

**let it ride**

**negative consequences happen right away. they never hang over you and give you and give you a chance to metagame**

## Rolls

When the GM calls for a roll, the player rolls a number of dice equal to their PC's most relevant bloodline score. If it's ambiguous which score is most relevant, the determination falls to the GM. Note that when casting a spell, the bloodline used for the roll is always the one that corresponds to the spell.

Each die that shows "1" is a **success**. If no successes are rolled (no dice show "1") then the roll is a **failure**. When a player rolls a single success, it means that their PC's action had more or less the result they intended. Additional successes indicate that the action went unexpectedly well, the details of which are left to the GM's imagination. On the other hand, a failed roll is always bad for the PCs, though of course it should still eb good for the story; the previous section discussed this idea in some detail, and the upcoming section addresses how it pertains specifically to confrontations.

Each roll has a level, which is set by the GM. A roll's level dictates the size of dice used, and, correspondingly, the roll's likeliness of success. **Minor** rolls use four-sided dice; **Significant** rolls use six-sided dice; **Incredible** rolls use eight-sided dice; **Legendary** rolls use ten-sided dice. It's recommended that Significant rolls be the most common, and that Legendary rolls be reserved for the truly outrageous, in order to maintain the tension and excitement that come with the ten-sided dice.

The level of a roll depends on the challenge in front of a PC as well as how they approach it. Sometimes it's easier to pick the lock, while other times it's easier to kick down the door. The GM should also take the PC's description into account. For example, a ranger and a scholar may have the same Elf score (and thus the same innate perceptiveness), but **how do I justify this without telling players to write "expert at fighting with all weapons always" on every sheet?**

A player can also influence roll level through mindful narration of their PC's actions. For example, if a PC wants to pick a lock quickly, they may be called to roll at a higher level (since the action is more difficult). The tradeoff is that any NPCs on the other side of the door will likely be caught by surprise if the PC is successful. Conversely, a player may be allowed to roll an attack at a lower difficulty if they describe their PC's berserk fervor, as the attack is more likely to inflict wounds on NPCs. However, such an onslaught might also convince the NPCs that they'd be better off ganging up on a more vulnerable PC.

## Confrontations

Action resolution during a confrontation is fundamentally no different from action resolution at any other time. However, the details merit additional discussion.

**one success means one wound on an NPC**

**one failure means one wound on a PC**

**There are other effects, of course: disarm, grapple, distract, cast spell, interact with environment**

**play is conversational. no set order. GM does not take turns per se, but may prompt underparticipating players: "so-and-so is coming at you -- what do you do?" GM can interject, exposit, even call for rolls.**

**Rolls follow fiction. If you have 4 PCs yelling at an NPC, it's not a social confrontation. That NPC is going to bail or call the guards!**

**PCs are expected to be the driving force. Take impetus. Set the pace. **

**Examples of failures:**
- **try to climb on the troll? it slams you into the wall.**
- **try to take pot shots into combat? maybe you miss and hit your friend**
- **in a social confrontation, you misspeak, insult someone important, get flustered**

**time and space are nebulous. "you're a little bit too far" is a lame reason to disallow something cool**





**The story drives the mechanics, not vice versa.** Time and space are not strictly defined. There is no turn order. Players should just keep playing, even if a confrontation is happening! 

**Only players roll dice.** PCs are expected to act, not react. The responsibility to advance the story falls to them. Furthermore, having players roll gives them some ownership of the ills that befall their PCs, as opposed to feeling that the unfortunate circumstances have been inflicted upon them.

**Rolls are appropriate only when an attempted action could result in multiple interesting outcomes.** Like any other roll, a roll in combat never results in nothing happening. A failed attack with a sword may mean that the PC's opponent ducked under the blade and landed a blow of their own. A failed roll to pick off an NPC from a distance may mean the arrow missed, but still drew attention to the hiding spot. 

**The outcomes of rolls should be important, but not too important.** As a rule, a PC inflicts one wound for each success they roll during a confrontation, and they suffer one wound for a failed roll. This is meant to give an idea for the magnitude of appropriate roll outcomes, not to imply that every roll should cause wounds. Grappling, kicking over a table to create a barriacade, sneaking out of the fray, creating a distraction, and countless other actions can be taken in combat to affect the behaviors of NPCs and the levels of future rolls!

Commit message:

Only "Confrontations" to go!
The first essay is written. It's not perfect -- I need an example of an interesting way for TBY to fail a roll, and I should squeeze in a mention of "let it ride" but it's workable.

04_action_resolution.md, after:

# Action resolution

Bloodlines is, for the most part, played by talking. The GM describes the situation that the PCs find themselves in. Players ask the GM for details, speak as their PCs, and narrate their actions. The GM explains what happens in response. This pattern continues on, back and forth. 

There is no turn order per se. Players participate when they have something to add. That said, the GM should moderate play to ensure that everyone participates. For example, an underparticipating players can be called to action with, "The troll bellows menacingly. Galadhel, what's your plan?" or "Tor Byorn, what are you up to while the others are in the meeting with Ambassador Xictli?" or "You've finally arrived at Threebridges. Oxye, where do you go first?"

The GM should allow most PC actions to succeed without pausing for a roll. There's no need to check if the PC can saddle their horse, or find the tavern in a new town. These actions are not difficult, and, more importantly, their failure wouldn't have interesting consequences. **Should I mention "let it ride" here?**

Similarly, the GM may decide that some actions fail, and decline to allow the a roll. For example, PCs might find it impossible to shatter a magical sword with a mundane hammer, or interrogate nonsentient monster. This should happen rarely; if at all possible, the GM should figure out a way to let the PCs roll for what they are trying to do.

The GM can interject at any time to call for a roll. They should do so when a PC attempts an action with two outcomes, both of which are plausible and interesting. A successful roll means that the PC gets more or less the effect they intended. A failed roll, on the other hand, should be viewed by the GM as an invitation to introduce a new and unfortunate plot twist. The failure should have an immediate effect, making it impossible for the PC to reattempt the same action, or at least raising the stakes. 

A roll's outcome should never be that nothing happens. This ensures that, one way or another, each roll moves the story along. A few examples follow:
- **TBY dwarf roll example**
- While weeding out an infestation of cultists in the sewers, the GM asks Galadhel (who walks ahead of the party as a scout) for an Elf roll. If it's successful, the GM tells her that she hears voices up ahead. If she fails the roll, on the other hand, the party is ambushed.
- Before opening a door, Father Liam notices that the hinge is set to trigger a switch as it opens. He attempts to disarm it, prompting a Goblin roll. If he succeeds, he's able to disarm the trap and open the door safely. If he fails, the trap triggers, and the room begins to fill with icy water. 
- Oxyehenhuain is caught out after curfew by two members of the city watch. She attempts to dispel their suspicions with a carefully concocted cover story. The GM calls for a Halfling roll. If Oxye succeeds, they politely escort her to her destination and continue their rounds. If she fails, they bind her hands, confiscate her scrolls, and lock her in a cell beneath the courthouse.

Note that only players roll dice in Bloodlines. When two NPCs interact, the GM simply decides on the outcome. This serves as a reminder that the PCs are the story's driving force; they are expected to act, not merely react. Rolling also gives the players a sense of ownership over the ills that befall their PCs as a result of rolls that go badly.
## Rolls

When the GM calls for a roll, the player rolls a number of dice equal to their PC's most relevant bloodline score. If it's ambiguous which score is most relevant, the determination falls to the GM. Note that when casting a spell, the bloodline used for the roll is always the one that corresponds to the spell.

Each die that shows "1" is a **success**. If no successes are rolled (no dice show "1") then the roll is a **failure**. When a player rolls a single success, it means that their PC's action had more or less the result they intended. Additional successes indicate that the action went unexpectedly well, the details of which are left to the GM's imagination. On the other hand, a failed roll is always bad for the PCs, though of course it should still eb good for the story; the previous section discussed this idea in some detail, and the upcoming section addresses how it pertains specifically to confrontations.

Each roll has a level, which is set by the GM. A roll's level dictates the size of dice used, and, correspondingly, the roll's likeliness of success. **Minor** rolls use four-sided dice; **Significant** rolls use six-sided dice; **Incredible** rolls use eight-sided dice; **Legendary** rolls use ten-sided dice. It's recommended that Significant rolls be the most common, and that Legendary rolls be reserved for the truly outrageous, in order to maintain the tension and excitement that come with the ten-sided dice.

The level of a roll depends on the challenge in front of a PC as well as how they approach it. Sometimes it's easier to pick the lock, while other times it's easier to kick down the door. The GM should also take the PC's description into account. For example, a ranger and a scholar may have the same Elf score (and thus the same innate perceptiveness), but **how do I justify this without telling players to write "expert at fighting with all weapons always" on every sheet?**

A player can also influence roll level through mindful narration of their PC's actions. For example, if a PC wants to pick a lock quickly, they may be called to roll at a higher level (since the action is more difficult). The tradeoff is that any NPCs on the other side of the door will likely be caught by surprise if the PC is successful. Conversely, a player may be allowed to roll an attack at a lower difficulty if they describe their PC's berserk fervor, as the attack is more likely to inflict wounds on NPCs. However, such an onslaught might also convince the NPCs that they'd be better off ganging up on a more vulnerable PC.

## Confrontations

Action resolution during a confrontation is fundamentally no different from action resolution at any other time. However, the details merit additional discussion.

**one success means one wound on an NPC**

**one failure means one wound on a PC**

**There are other effects, of course: disarm, grapple, distract, cast spell, interact with environment**

**play is conversational. no set order. GM does not take turns per se, but may prompt underparticipating players: "so-and-so is coming at you -- what do you do?" GM can interject, exposit, even call for rolls.**

**Rolls follow fiction. If you have 4 PCs yelling at an NPC, it's not a social confrontation. That NPC is going to bail or call the guards!**

**PCs are expected to be the driving force. Take impetus. Set the pace. **

**Examples of failures:**
- **try to climb on the troll? it slams you into the wall.**
- **try to take pot shots into combat? maybe you miss and hit your friend**
- **in a social confrontation, you misspeak, insult someone important, get flustered**

**time and space are nebulous. "you're a little bit too far" is a lame reason to disallow something cool**





**The story drives the mechanics, not vice versa.** Time and space are not strictly defined. There is no turn order. Players should just keep playing, even if a confrontation is happening! 

**Only players roll dice.** PCs are expected to act, not react. The responsibility to advance the story falls to them. Furthermore, having players roll gives them some ownership of the ills that befall their PCs, as opposed to feeling that the unfortunate circumstances have been inflicted upon them.

**Rolls are appropriate only when an attempted action could result in multiple interesting outcomes.** Like any other roll, a roll in combat never results in nothing happening. A failed attack with a sword may mean that the PC's opponent ducked under the blade and landed a blow of their own. A failed roll to pick off an NPC from a distance may mean the arrow missed, but still drew attention to the hiding spot. 

**The outcomes of rolls should be important, but not too important.** As a rule, a PC inflicts one wound for each success they roll during a confrontation, and they suffer one wound for a failed roll. This is meant to give an idea for the magnitude of appropriate roll outcomes, not to imply that every roll should cause wounds. Grappling, kicking over a table to create a barriacade, sneaking out of the fray, creating a distraction, and countless other actions can be taken in combat to affect the behaviors of NPCs and the levels of future rolls!
