04_advancing_player_characters.md, before:

# Advancing Player Characters

As PCs undergo ever-more heroic trials, their bloodlines in turn manifest more
and more strongly. In addition, PCs may find themselves developing magical
abilities as spells bubble up through their hereditary memory.

After each session, a player may **permanently increase any one of their PC's
boodline scores** by 1. It's most appropriate to increase a score that was
used more than usual in the most recent session – bartering with NPCs can
serve to strengthen the Merfolk bloodline, for example, and enduring harsh
environments can strengthen the Orc bloodline.

Instead of incrementing a bloodline score, a player may have their PC **learn
a single spell**. Learning a spell represents a small amount of magical
ability expressing itself through the PC. Spells cannot be taught; they must
arise naturally.

Each spell is a word. To cast the spell, the PC need only say the word, or
even hold it at the forefront of their mind. This can be done at any time.

While all PCs have access to spells, it bears noting that they are otherwise
rare. Most humans never know a spell; many never even meet someone who does.
Learning a new spell is always an event of note... though different sects of
Humanity disagree about which spells are good omens and which are bad.

The next pages list several example spells for each people.  Additionally, GMs
are encouraged to add their own in order to further illustrate the world the
PCs live in. It should be noted, however, that spells follow a specific
template:

Spells are in-world abilities intended to encourage open-ended, immersive
play. They do not deal explicitly with dice or bloodline scores. No rolls are
required to use them, though a player may still be prompted for a roll during
a spell's duration. For example, a spell may allow a PC to reshape stone as if
it were clay, but sculpting that stone into a particularly delicate form may
require a Halfling roll.

In fact, using a spell to make otherwise-impossible rolls is the whole point.
PCs can already do (or at least attempt) anything conceivable for a human;
spells add the ability to attempt things which are emphatically superhuman.

## Dwarf Spells

## Elf Spells

## Goblin spells

## Halfling spells

Commit message:

Up to date.
A few sample spells added for each people. These are not great spells, and not particularly orthogonal, but they are at least something playable in time for the playtest. We can come up with more, better spells later. 

I did try to come up with a variety of styles of spells so we can see what works. Some are static. SOme you roll for. Some explicitly modify rolls (analogous to stunts -- that's likely an analogy worth exploring).

04_advancing_player_characters.md, after:

# Advancing Player Characters

As PCs undergo ever-more heroic trials, their bloodlines in turn manifest more
and more strongly. In addition, PCs may find themselves developing magical
abilities as spells bubble up through their hereditary memory.

After each session, a player may **permanently increase any one of their PC's
boodline scores** by 1. It's most appropriate to increase a score that was
used more than usual in the most recent session – bartering with NPCs can
serve to strengthen the Merfolk bloodline, for example, and enduring harsh
environments can strengthen the Orc bloodline.

Instead of incrementing a bloodline score, a player may have their PC **learn
a single spell**. Learning a spell represents a small amount of magical
ability expressing itself through the PC. Spells cannot be taught; they must
arise naturally.

While all PCs have access to spells, it bears noting that they are otherwise
rare. Most humans never know a spell; many never even meet someone who does.
Learning a new spell is always an event of note... though different sects of
Humanity disagree about which spells are good omens and which are bad.

The next pages list several example spells for each people.  Additionally, GMs
are encouraged to add their own in order to further illustrate the world the
PCs live in. 

## Dwarf Spells

- **Stoneform**: You can petrify yourself. At will, you may take the form of an indestructible granite statue. The transformation takes only a moment. Your clothing and posessions change with you. While in statue form, you remain aware of your surroundings, and can change back at will. If the GM calls you to roll as part of casting this spell -- for example, to gauge your aim when you jump from a ledge, petrify in midair, and come crashing down at a particular target, roll Dwarf.
- **Stonestrike**: You can attach the weight of stone to your attacks, making them devastating, if unwieldy. Whenever you roll Dwarf to attack with a melee weapon, you may increase the difficulty of your roll by one level. If you do, and the roll is successful, each success you roll counts double.

## Elf Spells

- **Deathspeak**: You can speak to the dead. Upon encountering a corpse, you may ask it any number of questions. The corpse is bound to answer honestly to the best of its knowledge, even revealing information it would never have shared while alive. 
- **Treesight**: You can extend your senses through any living tree. As long as you are touching a tree, you may see, hear, and smell as if you were standing in the location of another living tree of your choice. You may name a specific tree, or name a location and see through the tree closest to it.

## Goblin spells

- **Stormcall**: You can control the weather around yourself. You can summon clouds, rain, fog, and so on. If the GM calls for a roll, roll Goblin; lightning strikes and hurricanes are not favors that Opochi dispenses lightly!
- **Wind blade**: You can call on the wind to add its daggers and arrows to your own, laying low many foes at once. Whenever you roll Goblin to attack with a ranged weapon, you may decrease the difficulty of your roll by one level. If you do, and you roll two or more successes, each success must affect a different NPC. 

## Halfling spells

- **Charm**: You can manipulate the feelings of NPCs, making them suddenly feel friendly towards you. You may roll Halfling to charm an NPC. While charmed, the NPC treats you as a close friend; they happily answer your questions and do as you request. The charm is immediately broken if the NPC feels threatened or suffers a wound.
- **Mirage**: You can create a silent illusion, as much as an armspan in each direction. The mirage may be overlaid on an existing object -- even a character -- in which case it will move with them. The mirage can persist outside of your presence, but it cannot act autonomously. If the mirage comes under particular scrutiny from NPCs, you may be called to roll Halfling to determine whether or not the NPCs detect your falsehood. You may maintain only a single mirage at a time.
