05_action_resolution.md, before:

# Action resolution

During the back-and-forth between players and the GM, a player will often
indicate that their PC is trying to do something. In most cases, the GM should
allow the action to succeed uncontested. Rolls need not be made to find the
tavern in a new town or make small talk with a nameless NPC; the actions are
not difficult, but more importantly, their failure would not have interesting
consequences. If failed, the player would just shrug and try again, wasting a
few moments of game time.

On occasion, a player may declare their PC's intention to do something that is
truly impossible. In such cases, the GM may of course inform them of the
action's failure; no roll is required. More common, however, is that a player
(particularly an inexperienced one) will declare an action that is
inappropriately broad, vague, or otherwise discordant with the flow of play –
trying to play out an entire important conversation in a single roll, for
example. In such cases, the GM should ask the player to rephrase their
intentions instead of having the action fail.

In some cases, however, a PC will attempt an action for which success is
uncertain (or even unlikely), and for which failure is interesting. In those
cases, the GM will prompt the player to roll in order to judge the outcome.

Players can be called to roll for actions where the PC takes the active role
(by swinging a sword or telling a lie) as well as those where the PC is
reactive (parrying or sensing deception). The GM never rolls dice – if an
action does not involve the PCs, the GM simply decides its outcome.

Note that a wound should never be inflicted on a PC without allowing the
player a roll to avoid it. No matter how far a PC falls, the player should
always be allowed a roll to land without serious injuries; no matter how long
the PCs have traveled without food and water, the player should always be
allowed a roll to push on just a little longer. Even if these rolls are nearly
certain to fail, allowing – or forcing – the player to roll gives them a
degree of ownership over the consequences their PCs suffer.

## Rolls

When the GM calls for a roll, the player throws a number of dice equal to
their PC's most relevant bloodline score. When using a spell, note that the
appropriate bloodline score may not be the one associated with the spell – for
example, summoning a fire spirit is a Satyr spell, but nicely asking it to
obey your commands would be a Merfolk roll. If it's unclear which roll is most
appropriate for a given action, the decision falls to the GM.

Each die that shows "1" is a **success**. If there are no successes (no dice
show "1") then the roll is a **failure**.

A single success is good for the PC – it means, roughly, that they succeeded
in whatever they were attempting. Additional successes mean things went
unexpectedly well. The details are left to the GM's discretion.

A failed roll means that something went wrong. This could be as simple as the
PC lacking the strength or skill to succeed. However, the GM is encouraged to
instead view a failed roll as an invitation to introduce a new and unfortunate
plot twist. For example, if the PCs are rooting out bandits in the sewers, a
failed Ranger roll for navigation could mean stumbling into an ambush or
running out of torches (as opposed to having the PCs come back empty-handed).
In this way, failed rolls should be bad for the PCs, but still good for the
story.

Rolls can be made at four difficulties – **Ordinary**, **Remarkable**,
**Incredible**, and **Legendary** – which are made on six-, eight-, ten-, and
twelve-sided dice (**d6**, **d8**, **d10**, and **d12**) respectively.  That
is, a more difficult roll is made on larger dice, making successes rarer. It's
recommended that Incredible and Legendary rolls be prompted rarely – only for
the truly outrageous – in order to preserve the tension that comes with the
larger dice.

The difficulty of a roll is judged holistically by the GM based on the
challenge in front of the PC as well as their approach to it. Sometimes it's
easier to pick the lock, while other times it's easier to kick down the door.

A player can exert some control over how the difficulty is judged through a
mindful narration of their PC's actions. A reckless attack is more likely to
wound an NPC, for example, so the GM may choose to have it rolled at a lower
difficulty. Similarly, picking a lock could be done at lower difficulty if the
PC takes the time to do it carefully. There may be negative consequences as
well, of course; if a PC attacks recklessly, they'll have a more difficult
time defending themselves when the NPC hits back, and picking a lock slowly
gives any NPCs on the other side of the door plenty of time to respond.

This goes the other way, too. A careful attack is less likely to injure an NPC
(and hence would be rolled at a higher difficulty), but leaves the PC in a
more defensible position; the roll to defend against the NPC's next attack
could (at the GM's discretion) be made at a lower difficulty. Picking a lock
quickly and quietly is very difficult, but if successful the PCs may be able
to catch the NPCs on the other side of the door unprepared!

Before a attempting any action, a player may ask the GM what the difficulty of
the roll would be. This helps bridge the gap between player and PC – for
example, a GM's narration may not convey clearly whether a chasm could
realistically be jumped, but a PC standing at its edge would have a pretty
good idea! In cases where the PC would not know the difficulty of an action
(for example an attack on a heretofore unknown sort of monster) the GM may
decline to answer, only revealing the difficulty when the PC is committed and
the roll is at hand.

## Combat

During physical confrontations, Bloodlines becomes somewhat more structured.
Play proceeds in rounds, the table is divided into **zones**, and PCs and NPCs
are represented within those zones by miniatures.

As combat begins, the GM will sketch out the area surrounding the PCs and
divide it into zones. In general, a zone's width should be the distance a PC
can move in a few moments – about five armspans on flat ground, and less in
the presence of obstacles and difficult terrain. Miniatures are used to
illustrate which PCs and NPCs are in each zone.

Any two characters in the same zone are close. They can speak to one another,
attack one another with melee weapons, and so on. Characters can shout into
adjacent zones and attack with ranged and thrown weapons. Characters in
non-adjacent zones may be aware of one another, but cannot otherwise interact.

Each round, the players and the GM each take a turn, with the GM's turn being
last. The turns may be taken in any order, though clockwise around the table
is recommended.

Note that a character does not get a turn unless they were aware of the
confrontation at the beginning of the round. For example, if the PCs are
caught unaware in an ambush, only the GM would take a turn in the first round
– PCs would not be allowed to act until the second round, because they were
not aware of the confrontation until after the first round started.

On each **player's turn**, that player plays out a few moments of their PC's
actions. They may move their PC to an adjacent zone, and may be prompted by
the GM for a single roll. The roll must make narrative sense – a player
engaged in a grapple cannot move freely, of course. Furthermore, the GM should
take the PC's move into account when gauging the difficulty of the player's
roll for the turn. Beheading a zombie may be Ordinary when the characters are
situated on level ground, Remarkable as the character charges through the
undergrowth, Incredible as the PC climbs their way up a steep cliff, and
Legendary if the PC is diving sword-first across a chasm.

On the **GM's turn**, the GM moves NPCs and prompts the players for rolls in
response to NPC actions taken against them. Each NPC generally prompts a
single roll, though this need not strictly be the case. A cerberus may bite
with all three of its heads, for example, so the GM would prompt a player to
roll three times. Similarly, a dragon surrounded by PCs may lash out with its
claws, tail, etc, prompting rolls from multiple players.

Rolls during combat work the same way as rolls outside of combat, with one
quick caveat: for each success on a player's turn, or for each failed roll on
the GM's turn, the only allowed effects on a PC or an NPC are to inflict a
single wound or to make that character unready. That is, a failed roll to
defend could result in a wound being inflicted on a PC, or that PC being made
unready; a single success on a PC's roll to attack could inflict a wound on an
NPC or make them unready; two successes can inflict two wounds on NPCs, wound
an NPC and make an NPC unready, or make two NPCs unready; etc.

**Unreadiness** is a catchall term to indicate that a PC or NPC is at a
momentary disadvantage. Just as inflicting a wound is how the rules show that
a character has been hit by a sword or weakened by a poison, unreadiness is
how they show that they have been distracted, disarmed, etc. Unreadiness is
indicated by turning the unready character's miniature on its side – note that
the miniatures of unconscious or dead characters should be removed from the
table entirely to avoid ambiguity.

While unready, a PC or NPC suffers a one-difficulty-step penalty to all rolls.
That is, if a PC is knocked prone, Ordinary parries would instead be rolled at
Remarkable difficulty (until the PC stands up). Similarly, if a taunt catches
an NPC's attention, an attack against them that would normally have required a
Incredible roll would be made at Remarkable difficulty instead (until the NPC
takes a moment to clear their head).

A PC or NPC recovers from unreadiness by skipping their turn. That means if an
NPC is made unready by a PC, each other PC has a moment to take advantage of
the situation before the NPC can recover. NPCs can take advantage of the same
opportunity when a PC is made unready, of course; for this reason, being
surrounded by multiple enemies is very dangerous!

Commit message:

Updated terminology in rolls explanations.
Updated the difficulty scale to Minor, Significant, Incredible, Legendary.

Changed "difficulty" to "level" to line up with monsters.

d6-d12 -> d4-d10.

Noted that default rolls are d6, and that legendary rolls are the rarest. 

Got rid of a Ranger (!) reference in the sewer example.

COnfrontations are not yet updated.

It was previously the case that spells could demand rolls other than the bloodline they came from -- that's no longer the case.

05_action_resolution.md, after:

# Action resolution

During the back-and-forth between players and the GM, a player will often
indicate that their PC is trying to do something. In most cases, the GM should
allow the action to succeed uncontested. Rolls need not be made to find the
tavern in a new town or make small talk with a nameless NPC; the actions are
not difficult, but more importantly, their failure would not have interesting
consequences. If failed, the player would just shrug and try again, wasting a
few moments of game time.

On occasion, a player may declare their PC's intention to do something that is
truly impossible. In such cases, the GM may of course inform them of the
action's failure; no roll is required. More common, however, is that a player
(particularly an inexperienced one) will declare an action that is
inappropriately broad, vague, or otherwise discordant with the flow of play –
trying to play out an entire important conversation in a single roll, for
example. In such cases, the GM should ask the player to rephrase their
intentions instead of having the action fail.

In some cases, however, a PC will attempt an action for which success is
uncertain (or even unlikely), and for which failure is interesting. In those
cases, the GM will prompt the player to roll in order to judge the outcome.

Players can be called to roll for actions where the PC takes the active role
(by swinging a sword or telling a lie) as well as those where the PC is
reactive (parrying or sensing deception). The GM never rolls dice – if an
action does not involve the PCs, the GM simply decides its outcome.

Note that a wound should never be inflicted on a PC without allowing the
player a roll to avoid it. No matter how far a PC falls, the player should
always be allowed a roll to land without serious injuries; no matter how long
the PCs have traveled without food and water, the player should always be
allowed a roll to push on just a little longer. Even if these rolls are nearly
certain to fail, allowing – or forcing – the player to roll gives them a
degree of ownership over the consequences their PCs suffer.

## Rolls

When the GM calls for a roll, the player throws a number of dice equal to
their PC's most relevant bloodline score – note that, when using a spell, the relevant bloodline score is the one associated with the spell. If it's unclear which roll is most
appropriate for a given action, the decision falls to the GM. 

Each die that shows "1" is a **success**. If there are no successes (no dice
show "1") then the roll is a **failure**.

A single success is good for the PC – it means, more or less, that they succeeded
in whatever they were attempting. Additional successes mean things went
unexpectedly well. The details are left to the GM's discretion.

A failed roll means that something went wrong. This could be as simple as the
PC lacking the strength or skill to succeed. However, the GM is encouraged to
instead view a failed roll as an invitation to introduce a new and unfortunate
plot twist. For example, if the PCs are rooting out bandits in the sewers, a
failed Elf roll for navigation could mean stumbling into an ambush or
running out of torches (as opposed to having the PCs come back empty-handed).
In this way, failed rolls should be bad for the PCs, but still good for the
story.

Rolls can be made at four levels – **Minor**, **Significant**,
**Incredible**, and **Legendary** – which are made on four-, six-, eight-, and
ten-sided dice (**d4**, **d6**, **d8**, and **d10**) respectively.  That
is, a higher level roll is made on larger dice, making successes more difficult. Significant rolls should be the most common, while Legendary rolls should be reserved for actions that are truly outrageous, in order to preserve the tension that comes with the larger dice.

The level of a roll is judged holistically by the GM based on the
challenge in front of the PC as well as their approach to it. Sometimes it's
easier to pick the lock, while other times it's easier to kick down the door.

A player can exert some control over how the level is judged through a
mindful narration of their PC's actions. A reckless attack is more likely to
wound an NPC, for example, so the GM may choose to have it rolled at a lower
level. Similarly, picking a lock could be done at lower level if the
PC takes the time to do it carefully. There may be negative consequences as
well, of course; if a PC attacks recklessly, they'll have a more difficult
time defending themselves when the NPC hits back, and picking a lock slowly
gives any NPCs on the other side of the door plenty of time to prepare an ambush.

This goes the other way, too. A careful attack is less likely to injure an NPC
(and hence would be rolled at a higher level), but leaves the PC in a
more defensible position; the roll to defend against the NPC's next attack
could (at the GM's discretion) be made at a lower level. Picking a lock
quickly and quietly is very difficult, but if successful the PCs may be able
to catch the NPCs on the other side of the door unprepared!

Before a attempting any action, a player may ask the GM what the level of
the roll would be. This helps bridge the gap between player and PC. For
example, a GM's narration may not convey clearly whether a chasm could
realistically be jumped, but a PC standing at its edge would have a pretty
good idea! In cases where the PC would not know the difficulty of an action
(for example an attack on a heretofore unknown sort of monster) the GM may
decline to answer, only revealing the roll's level when the PC is committed and
the roll is at hand.

## Confrontations

(Updated to here. -Charles)

During physical confrontations, Bloodlines becomes somewhat more structured.
Play proceeds in rounds, the table is divided into **zones**, and PCs and NPCs
are represented within those zones by miniatures.

As combat begins, the GM will sketch out the area surrounding the PCs and
divide it into zones. In general, a zone's width should be the distance a PC
can move in a few moments – about five armspans on flat ground, and less in
the presence of obstacles and difficult terrain. Miniatures are used to
illustrate which PCs and NPCs are in each zone.

Any two characters in the same zone are close. They can speak to one another,
attack one another with melee weapons, and so on. Characters can shout into
adjacent zones and attack with ranged and thrown weapons. Characters in
non-adjacent zones may be aware of one another, but cannot otherwise interact.

Each round, the players and the GM each take a turn, with the GM's turn being
last. The turns may be taken in any order, though clockwise around the table
is recommended.

Note that a character does not get a turn unless they were aware of the
confrontation at the beginning of the round. For example, if the PCs are
caught unaware in an ambush, only the GM would take a turn in the first round
– PCs would not be allowed to act until the second round, because they were
not aware of the confrontation until after the first round started.

On each **player's turn**, that player plays out a few moments of their PC's
actions. They may move their PC to an adjacent zone, and may be prompted by
the GM for a single roll. The roll must make narrative sense – a player
engaged in a grapple cannot move freely, of course. Furthermore, the GM should
take the PC's move into account when gauging the difficulty of the player's
roll for the turn. Beheading a zombie may be Ordinary when the characters are
situated on level ground, Remarkable as the character charges through the
undergrowth, Incredible as the PC climbs their way up a steep cliff, and
Legendary if the PC is diving sword-first across a chasm.

On the **GM's turn**, the GM moves NPCs and prompts the players for rolls in
response to NPC actions taken against them. Each NPC generally prompts a
single roll, though this need not strictly be the case. A cerberus may bite
with all three of its heads, for example, so the GM would prompt a player to
roll three times. Similarly, a dragon surrounded by PCs may lash out with its
claws, tail, etc, prompting rolls from multiple players.

Rolls during combat work the same way as rolls outside of combat, with one
quick caveat: for each success on a player's turn, or for each failed roll on
the GM's turn, the only allowed effects on a PC or an NPC are to inflict a
single wound or to make that character unready. That is, a failed roll to
defend could result in a wound being inflicted on a PC, or that PC being made
unready; a single success on a PC's roll to attack could inflict a wound on an
NPC or make them unready; two successes can inflict two wounds on NPCs, wound
an NPC and make an NPC unready, or make two NPCs unready; etc.

**Unreadiness** is a catchall term to indicate that a PC or NPC is at a
momentary disadvantage. Just as inflicting a wound is how the rules show that
a character has been hit by a sword or weakened by a poison, unreadiness is
how they show that they have been distracted, disarmed, etc. Unreadiness is
indicated by turning the unready character's miniature on its side – note that
the miniatures of unconscious or dead characters should be removed from the
table entirely to avoid ambiguity.

While unready, a PC or NPC suffers a one-difficulty-step penalty to all rolls.
That is, if a PC is knocked prone, Ordinary parries would instead be rolled at
Remarkable difficulty (until the PC stands up). Similarly, if a taunt catches
an NPC's attention, an attack against them that would normally have required a
Incredible roll would be made at Remarkable difficulty instead (until the NPC
takes a moment to clear their head).

A PC or NPC recovers from unreadiness by skipping their turn. That means if an
NPC is made unready by a PC, each other PC has a moment to take advantage of
the situation before the NPC can recover. NPCs can take advantage of the same
opportunity when a PC is made unready, of course; for this reason, being
surrounded by multiple enemies is very dangerous!
