# Action resolution

During the back-and-forth between players and the GM, a player will often
indicate that their PC is trying to do something. In most cases, the GM should
allow the action to succeed uncontested. Rolls need not be made to find the
tavern in a new town or make small talk with a nameless NPC; the actions are
not difficult, but more importantly, their failure would not have interesting
consequences. If failed, the player would just shrug and try again, wasting a
few moments of game time.

On occasion, a player may declare their PC's intention to do something that is
truly impossible. In such cases, the GM may of course inform them of the
action's failure; no roll is required. More common, however, is that a player
(particularly an inexperienced one) will declare an action that is
inappropriately broad, vague, or otherwise discordant with the flow of play –
trying to play out an entire important conversation in a single roll, for
example. In such cases, the GM should ask the player to rephrase their
intentions instead of having the action fail.

In some cases, however, a PC will attempt an action for which success is
uncertain (or even unlikely), and for which failure is interesting. In those
cases, the GM will prompt the player to roll in order to judge the outcome.

Players can be called to roll for actions where the PC takes the active role
(by swinging a sword or telling a lie) as well as those where the PC is
reactive (parrying or sensing deception). The GM never rolls dice – if an
action does not involve the PCs, the GM simply decides its outcome.

Note that a wound should never be inflicted on a PC without allowing the
player a roll to avoid it. No matter how far a PC falls, the player should
always be allowed a roll to land without serious injuries; no matter how long
the PCs have traveled without food and water, the player should always be
allowed a roll to push on just a little longer. Even if these rolls are nearly
certain to fail, allowing – or forcing – the player to roll gives them a
degree of ownership over the consequences their PCs suffer.

## Rolls

**The number of dice rolled is equal to the PC's most relevant bloodline score.** When rolling as part of a spell, the relevant bloodline score is the one associated with the spell. If it is ever unclear which bloodline is most relevant to an action, the decision falls to the GM.

**Each "1" rolled is a success; if no successes are rolled, the roll is failed.** A single success generally means that the player got more or less what they were hoping for. Additional successes mean that an action went unexpectedly well, the details of which fall to the GM's discretion. Failed rolls are bad for the PCs. As much as possible, a failed roll should not mean that a PC simply didn't do what they were attempting; failed rolls should be viewed by the GM as an invitation to introduce new and unfortunate plot twists into the story. 

**The size of die rolled is determined by the GM, as a holistic assessment of the action's difficulty.** Rolls come in four levels, **Minor**, **Significant**, **Incredible**, and **Legendary**, which are rolled on four-, six-, eight-, and ten-sided dice respectively. The level of a roll depends on the challenge in front of a PC as well as their approach to it; sometimes it's easier to pick the lock, while other times it's easier to kick down the door. 

**Players can influence the level of rolls they are confronted with through mindful narration of their PCs' actions.** For example, if a PC wants to pick a lock quickly, they may be called to roll at a higher level (since the action is more difficult). The tradeoff is that any NPCs on the other side of the door will likely be caught by surprise if the PC is successful. Conversely, a player may be allowed to roll an attack at a lower difficulty if they describe their PC's berserk fervor. The attack is more likely to inflict wounds on NPCs. However, such an onslaught might also convince the NPCs that they'd be better off ganging up on a squishier PC.

## Confrontations

