06_nonplayer_characters.md, before:

# Nonplayer Characters

The focus in Bloodlines is on the PCs. As a result, mechanically, NPCs are
truly minimal. They are defined entirely by their description and their number
of wounds, both of which are set at the discretion of the GM.

While PC character sheets are visible to everyone, only the GM knows the
details of NPCs. Player knowledge of an NPC is limited to what their PCs
know.

---

Like rolls, NPCs come in four levels: **Minor**, **Significant**,
**Incredible**, and **Legendary**, corresponding to **1**, **3**, **5**, and
**7** wounds respectively. An NPC is defeated if all of their wounds are
marked.

The NPC's number of wounds is chosen by the GM to reflect the NPC's size and
durability, as well as how interesting the NPC would be during a fight.  An
adversary who expects to simply trade a few blows back and forth with the PCs
should have few wounds, even if it is large, to prevent encounters from
becoming repetitive. Conversely, an NPC which is likely to provide a dynamic
and engaging confrontation (or one meant to make the PCs question their choice to
fight it) may be given a large number of wounds, even if it's small.

An NPC's level also serves as a starting point when establishing the
level of a roll taken against that NPC – most rolls taken against a
Significant NPC should be Significant, for example.  Relatedly,
most NPCs should have few wounds. The relative scarcity of Legendary monsters
– and the association of Legendary NPCs with Legendary rolls – serves to
maintain the tension and excitement that they bring.

---

NPC **descriptions** are analogous to PC descriptions. Both illustrate the
character's strengths and weaknesses, the circumstances that brought them into
the story, and the motivations that guide their ongoing actions.

The difference between them is how they apply to die rolls. Whereas a PC's
description guides the player as they assign their bloodline scores, an NPC's
description guides the GM as they assign levels to rolls. Clever PCs who
take advantage of an NPC's weaknesses may find themselves rolling at
levels lower than the NPC's level would suggest (for example, making a Minor roll against a Significant NPC), while careless NPCs may end up
rolling at higher levels (such as an Incredible roll made against a
Significant NPC).

Because of the importance of an NPC's description in determining roll
levels, it's crucial that it focus on details that might be important to
the NPC's interaction with PCs. Is the NPC intelligent, or capable of speech?
What might motivate it to attack a group of PCs, and how might it go about
doing so? What would the PCs be able to learn about this NPC, either from
researching it at a library or from speaking to the locals who have dealt with
it?

## Example NPC: Brigand

Each brigand is a Minor NPC – they have a single wound each. Their
description is as follows:

> The Rose Canyon is the safest road from Pinecastle to Northmark... or at
> least it was, until the Steel Hand Sisterhood began raiding caravans just
> days ago. Survivors recall little more than being ambushed by a volley of
> poisoned arrows.
>
> The Sisterhood is a diverse but tight-knit band of outlaws and mercenaries.
> They are known for driving hard bargains, but have never been known to break
> a contract once payment has been accepted.
>
> They are currently in the employ of the fearsome Lady Pearlbane. She has
> hired them to acquire a certain silver-inlaid chest, and send it back –
> unopened – to her agent in Pinecastle. Gold and captives are the
> Sisterhood's to keep.

As a Minor NPC, rolls against a brigand are made at the lowest level by default. However, there are cases where a player might be called to roll at a higher level instead:

- A Significant Dwarf roll would be necessary to fend off several brigands at once in hand-to-hand combat. They are unremarkable fighters, but extremely willing to take advantage of their superior numbers.
- An Incredible Elf roll could be made to deduce the motivation behind the attack. This could be done in a variety of ways, from recognizing the Sisterhood's insignia to hearing one brigand yell to another about the chest.
- A signficant Goblin roll would be necessary to sneak away from the ambush, while outnumbered by brigands hungry for hostages.
- A Legendary Halfling roll would be necessary to switch places with a brigand during the scuffle, perhaps grabbing some clothing from a fallen body, in order to infiltrate their ranks.

## Example NPC: Cerberus

A cerberus is a Remarkable NPC – it has three wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> The cerberi are twice as large as even the fiercest dog, with three times as
> many heads. They are known for their obedience and attentiveness; as a
> result, they were once deployed as elite guards. Many ancient treasures lay buried in far
> corners of the world, forgotten by all except the cerberi that still stand
> by.
>
> Sneaking past an alert cerberus is near-impossible – each of its many eyes,
> ears, and noses is sharp. However, it's said that skillfully-played music
> can lure the beasts into a brief sleep.
>
> This cerebus is named Hammermaw. It has stood vigil at the entry to this
> cave for centuries, guarding its long-dead master's hoard of gold and gems.

As a Significant NPC, a Cerberus has levels both above and below it. The following are examples of how savvy PCs might find themselves making Minor rolls, and how careless PCs might instead be called to roll at Incredible or even Legendary.

- An Incredible Dwarf roll would be necessary to forcefully restrain a cerberus. There are few safe places to grab a beast with so many teeth!
- A Minor Elf roll would be necessary to identify a cerberus. They are rare beasts, but famous. Scholars can often speculate at the treasure contained in a vault based only on the fur color of the cerberus that guards it.
- A Legendary Goblin roll would be necessary to, by keeping to the shadows and taking soft steps, make one's way past an alert cerberus.  
- A Minor Halfling roll would be necessary to lull a cerberus to sleep, whether by singing or through the use of a musical instrument... if for some reason a PC felt it wise to carry a lute deep into the wilderness!

## Example NPC: Stegosaurus

Each stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC – they have five wounds each.  Their
description is as follows:

> Stegosauruses are armored lizards with rows of bony plates on their backs
> and sharp spikes at the end of their tails. Fully grown they stand two
> armspans tall and five armspans long, though their tiny heads are held just
> off the ground.
>
> Though nearly unknown in the north, stegosaurus herds are a common sight in
> the grasslands of the south. They travel in herds of up to a dozen, grazing
> from dawn until dusk. At night they sleep in a circle with their young in
> the middle.
>
> Stegosauruses are peaceful herbivores by nature, but dim-witted and easily
> frightened. When surprised or threatened, they react violently, swinging
> their tails with surprising force and speed.

The stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC. PCs who take advantage of its weaknesses may be able to make rolls at Significant or even Minor level, while those who play against the beast's strengths may find themselves making Legendary rolls.

- A Significant Dwarf roll would be necessary to wrestle a stegosaurus to the ground... provided the PC could get close enough. The stegosaurus' tail cannot reach to strike so far forward, and its neck muscles are too weak to throw off an attacker. 
- A Minor Elf roll would be necessary to identify a stegosaurus as an herbivore. This would allow the PC to warn the rest of the party, and avoid a dangerous confrontation.
- A Legendary Elf roll would be necessary to 
- A Legendary Goblin roll would be necessary to fell a stegosaurus with a bow and arrow. The beast presents a large target, but its vulnerable parts are small. 

## Example NPC: Dragon

A dragon is a Legendary NPC – it has seven wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> Dragons are among the most fearsome beasts the world has ever known.  They
> are serpents with leathery wings, barbed tails, and razor-edged claws and
> teeth. They hatch no larger than cats, but grow continuously throughout
> their lives, which can be centuries long. Dragons are clever and cruel, but
> also proud and vain – luckily for humans, two dragons are more likely to
> kill one another than to work together towards a common goal.
>
> Even among dragons, Lady Pearlbane is notorious for her obsession with
> riches. She lays waste to cities and caravans in search of precious metals
> and gemstones, then uses her fiery breath to smelt her favorite pieces onto
> herself like armor. The entrance to her lair is scattered with the bones of
> adventurers who sought to reclaim their stolen treasures.

-   An Ordinary Elf roll would be made to track the dragon back to its lair.
    Though the beast flies, leaving no tracks, its home could perhaps be
    deduced  based on local geography and the behavior of nearby animals.
-   A Remarkable Merfolk roll would be made to convince the dragon (through
    flattery and reverent language) to listen to the PCs... rather than eating
    them outright and claiming any treasure they may have been carrying.
-   An Incredible Halfling roll would be made to surreptitiously steal a
    trinket  during a conversation with the dragon.
-   A Legendary Goblin roll would be made while negotiating back and forth
    with  Lady Pearlbane to grab a trinket and run! Perhaps her great bulk –
    and her  surprise at the PC's stupidity – would slow her down enough for
    the PC to  escaps.

Commit message:

Up to date.
OK, not quite, but it's good enough for now. I need to come up with an incredible Goblin roll that you would make against a dragon. Ideally, neither sneaking nor shooting. Maybe the dragon keeps something important behind a locked door, but it's too cocky to have a good lock?

06_nonplayer_characters.md, after:

# Nonplayer Characters

The focus in Bloodlines is on the PCs. As a result, mechanically, NPCs are
truly minimal. They are defined entirely by their description and their number
of wounds, both of which are set at the discretion of the GM.

While PC character sheets are visible to everyone, only the GM knows the
details of NPCs. Player knowledge of an NPC is limited to what their PCs
know.

---

Like rolls, NPCs come in four levels: **Minor**, **Significant**,
**Incredible**, and **Legendary**, corresponding to **1**, **3**, **5**, and
**7** wounds respectively. An NPC is defeated if all of their wounds are
marked.

The NPC's number of wounds is chosen by the GM to reflect the NPC's size and
durability, as well as how interesting the NPC would be during a fight.  An
adversary who expects to simply trade a few blows back and forth with the PCs
should have few wounds, even if it is large, to prevent encounters from
becoming repetitive. Conversely, an NPC which is likely to provide a dynamic
and engaging confrontation (or one meant to make the PCs question their choice to
fight it) may be given a large number of wounds, even if it's small.

An NPC's level also serves as a starting point when establishing the
level of a roll taken against that NPC – most rolls taken against a
Significant NPC should be Significant, for example.  Relatedly,
most NPCs should have few wounds. The relative scarcity of Legendary monsters
– and the association of Legendary NPCs with Legendary rolls – serves to
maintain the tension and excitement that they bring.

---

NPC **descriptions** are analogous to PC descriptions. Both illustrate the
character's strengths and weaknesses, the circumstances that brought them into
the story, and the motivations that guide their ongoing actions.

The difference between them is how they apply to die rolls. Whereas a PC's
description guides the player as they assign their bloodline scores, an NPC's
description guides the GM as they assign levels to rolls. Clever PCs who
take advantage of an NPC's weaknesses may find themselves rolling at
levels lower than the NPC's level would suggest (for example, making a Minor roll against a Significant NPC), while careless NPCs may end up
rolling at higher levels (such as an Incredible roll made against a
Significant NPC).

Because of the importance of an NPC's description in determining roll
levels, it's crucial that it focus on details that might be important to
the NPC's interaction with PCs. Is the NPC intelligent, or capable of speech?
What might motivate it to attack a group of PCs, and how might it go about
doing so? What would the PCs be able to learn about this NPC, either from
researching it at a library or from speaking to the locals who have dealt with
it?

## Example NPC: Brigand

Each brigand is a Minor NPC – they have a single wound each. Their
description is as follows:

> The Rose Canyon is the safest road from Pinecastle to Northmark... or at
> least it was, until the Steel Hand Sisterhood began raiding caravans just
> days ago. Survivors recall little more than being ambushed by a volley of
> poisoned arrows.
>
> The Sisterhood is a diverse but tight-knit band of outlaws and mercenaries.
> They are known for driving hard bargains, but have never been known to break
> a contract once payment has been accepted.
>
> They are currently in the employ of the fearsome Lady Pearlbane. She has
> hired them to acquire a certain silver-inlaid chest, and send it back –
> unopened – to her agent in Pinecastle. Gold and captives are the
> Sisterhood's to keep.

As a Minor NPC, rolls against a brigand are made at the lowest level by default. However, there are cases where a player might be called to roll at a higher level instead:

- A Significant Dwarf roll would be necessary to fend off several brigands at once in hand-to-hand combat. They are unremarkable fighters, but extremely willing to take advantage of their superior numbers.
- An Incredible Elf roll could be made to deduce the motivation behind the attack. This could be done in a variety of ways, from recognizing the Sisterhood's insignia to hearing one brigand yell to another about the chest.
- A Legendary Halfling roll would be necessary to switch places with a brigand during the scuffle, perhaps grabbing some clothing from a fallen body, in order to infiltrate their ranks.

## Example NPC: Cerberus

A cerberus is a Remarkable NPC – it has three wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> The cerberi are twice as large as even the fiercest dog, with three times as
> many heads. They are known for their obedience and attentiveness; as a
> result, they were once deployed as elite guards. Many ancient treasures lay buried in far
> corners of the world, forgotten by all except the cerberi that still stand
> by.
>
> Sneaking past an alert cerberus is near-impossible – each of its many eyes,
> ears, and noses is sharp. However, it's said that skillfully-played music
> can lure the beasts into a brief sleep.
>
> This cerebus is named Hammermaw. It has stood vigil at the entry to this
> cave for centuries, guarding its long-dead master's hoard of gold and gems.

As a Significant NPC, a Cerberus has levels both above and below it. The following are examples of how savvy PCs might find themselves making Minor rolls, and how careless PCs might instead be called to roll at Incredible or even Legendary.

- An Incredible Dwarf roll would be necessary to forcefully restrain a cerberus. There are few safe places to grab a beast with so many teeth!
- A Legendary Goblin roll would be necessary to, by keeping to the shadows and taking soft steps, make one's way past an alert cerberus.  
- A Minor Halfling roll would be necessary to lull a cerberus to sleep, whether by singing or through the use of a musical instrument... if for some reason a PC felt it wise to carry a lute deep into the wilderness!

## Example NPC: Stegosaurus

Each stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC – they have five wounds each.  Their
description is as follows:

> Stegosauruses are massive lizards with rows of bony plates on their backs
> and sharp spikes at the end of their tails. Fully grown they stand two
> armspans tall and five armspans long, though their tiny heads are held just
> off the ground.
>
> Though nearly unknown in the north, stegosaurus herds are a common sight in
> the grasslands of the south. They travel in herds of up to a dozen, grazing
> from dawn until dusk. At night they sleep in a circle with their young in
> the middle.
>
> Stegosauruses are peaceful herbivores by nature, but dim-witted and easily
> frightened. When surprised or threatened, they react violently, swinging
> their tails with surprising force and speed.

The stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC. PCs who take advantage of its weaknesses may be able to make rolls at Significant or even Minor level, while those who play against the beast's strengths may find themselves making Legendary rolls.

- A Legendary Dwarf roll would be necessary attack a stegosaurus head-on. The stegosaurus' tail gives it more reach than even a spear or polearm. 
- A Significant Elf roll would be necessary to calm a stegosaurus once agitated. The creatures fight out of fear, not hunger or malice. 
- A Minor Goblin roll would be necessary to shoot a stegosaurus with an arrow. Its flanks are enormous, and the beast's hide is no match for honed steel. Of course, it takes many arrows to fell a stegosaurus... the first only makes it angry. 

## Example NPC: Dragon

A dragon is a Legendary NPC – it has seven wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> Dragons are among the most fearsome beasts the world has ever known.  They
> are serpents with leathery wings, barbed tails, and razor-edged claws and
> teeth. They hatch no larger than cats, but grow continuously throughout
> their lives, which can be centuries long. Dragons are clever and cruel, but
> also proud and vain – luckily for humans, two dragons are more likely to
> kill one another than to work together towards a common goal.
>
> Even among dragons, Lady Pearlbane is notorious for her obsession with
> riches. She lays waste to cities and caravans in search of precious metals
> and gemstones, then uses her fiery breath to smelt her favorite pieces onto
> herself like armor. The entrance to her lair is scattered with the bones of
> adventurers who sought to reclaim their stolen treasures.

- A Minor Elf roll would be necessary to find the dragon's lair. Nearby geographic features and the behavior of local wildlife could provide clues.
- An Incredible Goblin roll...
- A Significant Halfling roll would be necessary to grant the PCs audience, through a combination of reverent titles and flattery, as opposed to eating them outright and claiming any treasure they may be carrying
