07_sample_npcs.md, before:

# Sample NPCs

**It probably makes sense to mimic how we handle PCs, with putting the samples right after the chapter where we explain them. The examples are short, so it shouldn't really disrupt the flow of the rules.**

## Brigand

**Where did the brigand go? Did this get misplaced in a copy-paste somewhere?**

## Cerberus

A cerberus is a Remarkable NPC – it has three wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> The cerberi are twice as large as even the fiercest dog, with three times as
> many heads. They are known for their obedience and attentiveness; as a
> result, they were once deployed as elite guards. Many ancient treasures lay buried in far
> corners of the world, forgotten by all except the cerberi that still stand
> by.
>
> Sneaking past an alert cerberus is near-impossible – each of its many eyes,
> ears, and noses is sharp. However, it's said that skillfully-played music
> can lure the beasts into a brief sleep.
>
> This cerebus is named Hammermaw. It has stood vigil at the entry to this
> cave for centuries, guarding its long-dead master's hoard of gold and gems.

As a Significant NPC, a Cerberus has levels both above and below it. The following are examples of how savvy PCs might find themselves making Minor rolls, and how careless PCs might instead be called to roll at Incredible or even Legendary.

- An Incredible Dwarf roll would be necessary to forcefully restrain a cerberus. There are few safe places to grab a beast with so many teeth!
- A Legendary Goblin roll would be necessary to, by keeping to the shadows and taking soft steps, make one's way past an alert cerberus. 
- A Minor Halfling roll would be necessary to lull a cerberus to sleep, whether by singing or through the use of a musical instrument... if for some reason a PC felt it wise to carry a lute deep into the wilderness!

## Stegosaurus

Each stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC – they have five wounds each.  Their
description is as follows:

> Stegosauruses are massive lizards with rows of bony plates on their backs
> and sharp spikes at the end of their tails. Fully grown they stand two
> armspans tall and five armspans long, though their tiny heads are held just
> off the ground.
>
> Though nearly unknown in the north, stegosaurus herds are a common sight in
> the grasslands of the south. They travel in herds of up to a dozen, grazing
> from dawn until dusk. At night they sleep in a circle with their young in
> the middle.
>
> Stegosauruses are peaceful herbivores by nature, but dim-witted and easily
> frightened. When surprised or threatened, they react violently, swinging
> their tails with surprising force and speed.

The stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC. PCs who take advantage of its weaknesses may be able to make rolls at Significant or even Minor level, while those who play against the beast's strengths may find themselves making Legendary rolls.

- A Legendary Dwarf roll would be necessary attack a stegosaurus head-on. The stegosaurus' tail gives it more reach than even a spear or polearm. 
- A Significant Elf roll would be necessary to calm a stegosaurus once agitated. The creatures fight out of fear, not hunger or malice. 
- A Minor Goblin roll would be necessary to shoot a stegosaurus with an arrow. Its flanks are enormous, and the beast's hide is no match for honed steel. Of course, it takes many arrows to fell a stegosaurus... the first only makes it angry. 

## Dragon

A dragon is a Legendary NPC – it has seven wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> Dragons are among the most fearsome beasts the world has ever known.  They
> are serpents with leathery wings, barbed tails, and razor-edged claws and
> teeth. They hatch no larger than cats, but grow continuously throughout
> their lives, which can be centuries long. Dragons are clever and cruel, but
> also proud and vain – luckily for humans, two dragons are more likely to
> kill one another than to work together towards a common goal.
>
> Even among dragons, Lady Pearlbane is notorious for her obsession with
> riches. She lays waste to cities and caravans in search of precious metals
> and gemstones, then uses her fiery breath to smelt her favorite pieces onto
> herself like armor. The entrance to her lair is scattered with the bones of
> adventurers who sought to reclaim their stolen treasures.

- A Minor Elf roll would be necessary to find the dragon's lair. Nearby geographic features and the behavior of local wildlife could provide clues.
- An Incredible Goblin roll...
- A Significant Halfling roll would be necessary to grant the PCs audience, through a combination of reverent titles and flattery, as opposed to eating them outright and claiming any treasure they may be carrying

Commit message:

Re-add brigand
This was mistakenly cut out in a previous edit when the NPC chapter was split off from the sample NPCs.

07_sample_npcs.md, after:

# Sample NPCs

**It probably makes sense to mimic how we handle PCs, with putting the samples right after the chapter where we explain them. The examples are short, so it shouldn't really disrupt the flow of the rules.**

## Brigand

A brigand is a Minor NPC – they have a single wound each. Their
description is as follows:

> The Rose Canyon is the safest road from Pinecastle to Northmark... or at
> least it was, until the Steel Hand Sisterhood began raiding caravans just
> days ago. 
>
> The Sisterhood is a diverse but tight-knit band of outlaws and mercenaries.
> They are known for driving hard bargains, but have never been known to break
> a contract once payment has been accepted.
>
> They are currently in the employ of the fearsome Lady Pearlbane. She has
> hired them to acquire a certain silver-inlaid chest, and send it back –
> unopened – to her agent in Pinecastle. Gold and captives are the
> Sisterhood's to keep.

As a Minor NPC, rolls against a brigand are made at the lowest level by default. However, there are cases where a player might be called to roll at a higher level instead:

- A Significant Dwarf roll would be necessary to fend off several brigands at once in hand-to-hand combat. They are unremarkable fighters, but extremely willing to take advantage of their superior numbers.
- An Incredible Elf roll could be made to deduce the motivation behind the attack. This could be done in a variety of ways, from recognizing the Sisterhood's insignia to hearing one brigand yell to another about the chest.
- A Legendary Halfling roll would be necessary to switch places with a brigand during the scuffle, perhaps grabbing some clothing from a fallen body, in order to infiltrate their ranks.

## Cerberus

A cerberus is a Remarkable NPC – it has three wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> The cerberi are twice as large as even the fiercest dog, with three times as
> many heads. They are known for their obedience and attentiveness; as a
> result, they were once deployed as elite guards. Many ancient treasures lay buried in far
> corners of the world, forgotten by all except the cerberi that still stand
> by.
>
> Sneaking past an alert cerberus is near-impossible – each of its many eyes,
> ears, and noses is sharp. However, it's said that skillfully-played music
> can lure the beasts into a brief sleep.
>
> This cerebus is named Hammermaw. It has stood vigil at the entry to this
> cave for centuries, guarding its long-dead master's hoard of gold and gems.

As a Significant NPC, a Cerberus has levels both above and below it. The following are examples of how savvy PCs might find themselves making Minor rolls, and how careless PCs might instead be called to roll at Incredible or even Legendary.

- An Incredible Dwarf roll would be necessary to forcefully restrain a cerberus. There are few safe places to grab a beast with so many teeth!
- A Legendary Goblin roll would be necessary to, by keeping to the shadows and taking soft steps, make one's way past an alert cerberus. 
- A Minor Halfling roll would be necessary to lull a cerberus to sleep, whether by singing or through the use of a musical instrument... if for some reason a PC felt it wise to carry a lute deep into the wilderness!

## Stegosaurus

Each stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC – they have five wounds each.  Their
description is as follows:

> Stegosauruses are massive lizards with rows of bony plates on their backs
> and sharp spikes at the end of their tails. Fully grown they stand two
> armspans tall and five armspans long, though their tiny heads are held just
> off the ground.
>
> Though nearly unknown in the north, stegosaurus herds are a common sight in
> the grasslands of the south. They travel in herds of up to a dozen, grazing
> from dawn until dusk. At night they sleep in a circle with their young in
> the middle.
>
> Stegosauruses are peaceful herbivores by nature, but dim-witted and easily
> frightened. When surprised or threatened, they react violently, swinging
> their tails with surprising force and speed.

The stegosaurus is an Incredible NPC. PCs who take advantage of its weaknesses may be able to make rolls at Significant or even Minor level, while those who play against the beast's strengths may find themselves making Legendary rolls.

- A Legendary Dwarf roll would be necessary attack a stegosaurus head-on. The stegosaurus' tail gives it more reach than even a spear or polearm. 
- A Significant Elf roll would be necessary to calm a stegosaurus once agitated. The creatures fight out of fear, not hunger or malice. 
- A Minor Goblin roll would be necessary to shoot a stegosaurus with an arrow. Its flanks are enormous, and the beast's hide is no match for honed steel. Of course, it takes many arrows to fell a stegosaurus... the first only makes it angry. 

## Dragon

A dragon is a Legendary NPC – it has seven wounds. Its description is as
follows:

> Dragons are among the most fearsome beasts the world has ever known.  They
> are serpents with leathery wings, barbed tails, and razor-edged claws and
> teeth. They hatch no larger than cats, but grow continuously throughout
> their lives, which can be centuries long. Dragons are clever and cruel, but
> also proud and vain – luckily for humans, two dragons are more likely to
> kill one another than to work together towards a common goal.
>
> Even among dragons, Lady Pearlbane is notorious for her obsession with
> riches. She lays waste to cities and caravans in search of precious metals
> and gemstones, then uses her fiery breath to smelt her favorite pieces onto
> herself like armor. The entrance to her lair is scattered with the bones of
> adventurers who sought to reclaim their stolen treasures.

- A Minor Elf roll would be necessary to find the dragon's lair. Nearby geographic features and the behavior of local wildlife could provide clues.
- An Incredible Goblin roll...
- A Significant Halfling roll would be necessary to grant the PCs audience, through a combination of reverent titles and flattery, as opposed to eating them outright and claiming any treasure they may be carrying
