09_appendix_sample_spells.md, before:

# Appendix III: Sample Spells

**Explain here how people can come up with their own spells? These are immersive, in-world abilities each with a variety of uses. Or does this go in the PC section, where we explain what spells are? I think it goes here.**

**Note that rolls for a spell always use the bloodline associated with that spell. Even at-will spells can prompt rolls, depending on the effect. For example, if you want to cannonball onto a bunch of enemies using Stoneform, the roll would measure your coordination and aim. If you want to call in some fog for cover using Stormcall, the roll would test how thick of a fog Opochi felt fit to bless you with.**

## Dwarf Spells

- **Immobilize**: You can, by touching a nonliving object, render it absolutely immobile, even resisting the effects of gravity. This ability can be used to hold a door shut. It can restrain an NPC by locking their armor in place. It can even be used to climb hand-over-hand straight up into the air, by holding a pair of ladder rungs and alternating which is immobile. 
- **Stoneform**: You can turn yourself (as well as your clothing and posessions) into an indestructible stone statue. The transformation takes only a moment. While in statue form, you remain aware of your surroundings, and can change back at will. This ability can be used to lock an NPC into a grapple by becoming rigid around them. It can be use to create cover for other PCs. A PC could even jump from a ledge and petrify in midair to come crashing down into a group of enemies. 

## Elf Spells

- **Chronokinesis**: You can shunt objects forward in time. You can cause any nonliving object that you can hold in your hands to vanish, then reappear at the exact same location at a later point in time. This ability is useful for hiding objects. It can similarly be used to smuggle things into an area that is only guarded at select times. It can even, if the PC's foresight is good enough, set up traps and ambushes. 
- **Clairvoyance**: Details TBD. Perhaps use plants or animals? This can be used to spy, to navigate, and to communicate over long distances.

## Goblin spells

- **Stormcall**: You can control the weather around yourself, calling down all sorts of weather patterns or precipitation. This ability can be used to call in a concealing fog. It can assault enemies (and possibly friends) with hail and lightning. It can also summon gusts of wind to push things around. 
- **Water Affinity**: Breathe underwater, walk on water, create water? control water?

## Halfling spells

- **Charm**: You can cast a charm on an NPC. Only one NPC can be charmed at a time. Charmed NPCs treat the charmer (and any companions) as close friends, and happily comply with any requests the PCs make. The charm is immediately broken if the NPC feels threatened or suffers a wound. This spell can be used to gain information from an NPC that might otherwise be unhelpful. Charmed NPCs can also carry out favors for the PCs, which often amounts to nothing more than creating a distraction.
- **Illusion**: You can cause others to perceive false (but convincing) sights, sounds, and smells. Illusions can be no larger in scale than an armspan in every direction, though the GM may relax this rule to allow very simple illusions (perhaps a wall with no accompanying sound or smell) to be larger. The sound and smell created can never be of such a scale that it causes an NPC harm. If any NPCs are present when the illusion is created the GM will likely call for a roll, and additional rolls may be necessary as NPCs interact with the illusion or subject it to particular scrutiny. This spell can be used to create disguises, by layering a false image over a PC's face or clothing. It can be used to intimidate aggressors by presenting a fearsome monster. It is also useful for creating distractions, for example the sound of battle or screaming which appears to come from a particular direction.

Commit message:

Added soem spells
Sketched out a few more spells. The biggest one we still need is a Dwarf spell that has something to do with fire.

09_appendix_sample_spells.md, after:

# Appendix III: Sample Spells

**Explain here how people can come up with their own spells? These are immersive, in-world abilities each with a variety of uses. Or does this go in the PC section, where we explain what spells are? I think it goes here.**

**Note that rolls for a spell always use the bloodline associated with that spell. Even at-will spells can prompt rolls, depending on the effect. For example, if you want to cannonball onto a bunch of enemies using Stoneform, the roll would measure your coordination and aim. If you want to call in some fog for cover using Stormcall, the roll would test how thick of a fog Opochi felt fit to bless you with.**

## Dwarf Spells

- **Immobolize Metal**: You can, by touching a piece of metal, render it absolutely immobile, even resisting the effects of gravity. This ability can be used to hold a door shut. It can restrain an NPC by locking their armor in place. It can even be used to climb hand-over-hand straight up into the air, by holding a pair of ladder rungs and alternating which is immobile. 
- **Stoneform**: You can turn yourself (as well as your clothing and posessions) into an indestructible stone statue. The transformation takes only a moment. While in statue form, you remain aware of your surroundings, and can change back at will. This ability can be used to lock an NPC into a grapple by becoming rigid around them. It can be use to create cover for other PCs. A PC could even jump from a ledge and petrify in midair to come crashing down into a group of enemies. 
- **Something about fire! Dwarves are supposed to have the fire-aligned goddess.**

## Elf Spells

- **Chronokinesis**: You can shunt objects forward in time. You can cause any nonliving object that you can hold in your hands to vanish, then reappear at the exact same location at a later point in time. This ability is useful for hiding objects. It can similarly be used to smuggle things into an area that is only guarded at select times. It can even, if the PC's foresight is good enough, set up traps and ambushes. 
- **Animal Bond**: **This is a sorta clairvoyance/sending. You bond with a willing animal. Can bugs consent, or does the animal need to be smart? You can see what it sees. You can communicate telepathically with the animal, even guiding its actions, as long as it tolerates you. This can be used to spy, to navigate, and to communicate over long distances.**
- **Shape Wood**: **you can neither create nor destroy mass, only change its shape. You ahve to touch it. Influence is limited to a volume about an armspan in every direction. You can use this to warp a bow or shield into an unusable shape, create tools or other mundane objects, and fold back locked doors or even walls.**

## Goblin spells

- **Stormcall**: You can control the weather around yourself, calling down all sorts of weather patterns or precipitation. This ability can be used to call in a concealing fog. It can assault enemies (and possibly friends) with hail and lightning. It can also summon gusts of wind to push things around. 
- **Water Affinity**: **Breathe underwater, walk on water, create water? control water?**
- **Spider Climb**: **You can hold your weight by clinging to nothing more than the tiny cracks and imperfections in stone, masonry, wood, etc. This lets you climb up sheer walls and even on ceilings. Use this to hide (nobody ever looks up!), or to circumvent traps or obstacles, or to scale sheer surfaces.**

## Halfling spells

- **Charm**: You can cast a charm on an NPC. Only one NPC can be charmed at a time. Charmed NPCs treat the charmer (and any companions) as close friends, and happily comply with any requests the PCs make. The charm is immediately broken if the NPC feels threatened or suffers a wound. This spell can be used to gain information from an NPC that might otherwise be unhelpful. Charmed NPCs can also carry out favors for the PCs, which often amounts to nothing more than creating a distraction.
- **Illusion**: You can cause others to perceive false (but convincing) sights, sounds, and smells. Illusions can be no larger in scale than an armspan in every direction, though the GM may relax this rule to allow very simple illusions (perhaps a wall with no accompanying sound or smell) to be larger. The sound and smell created can never be of such a scale that it causes an NPC harm. If any NPCs are present when the illusion is created the GM will likely call for a roll, and additional rolls may be necessary as NPCs interact with the illusion or subject it to particular scrutiny. This spell can be used to create disguises, by layering a false image over a PC's face or clothing. It can be used to intimidate aggressors by presenting a fearsome monster. It is also useful for creating distractions, for example the sound of battle or screaming which appears to come from a particular direction. 
- **Read Mind**: **Read surface thoughts. Use this to surreptitiously gather information, see through a deception or disguise, or prepare for a deception or disguise of your own.**
